                                                                                               Circular No. 250/07/2025-GST

                                              F. No. CBIC-20010/22/2025-GST
                                                        Government of India
                                                         Ministry of Finance
                                                      Department of Revenue
                                    Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs
                                                            GST Policy Wing
                                                                                                              North Block, New Delhi
                                                                                                                 Dated: 24       th June, 2025

To,

The Principal Chief Commissioners/ Chief Commissioners (All)

The Principal Director General/ Director General (All)

Madam/Sir,

           Subject: Reviewing authority, Revisional Authority and Appellate Authority in
           respect of orders passed by Common Adjudicating Authority (CAA) for show
           cause notices issued by DGGI - reg.

           Attention is drawn to notification No. 02/2017 dated 19                                  th June 2017 (as amended) read
with circular No. 239/33/2024-GST dated 04                                 th December 2024, wherein Joint/Additional

Commissioners posted in specified Commissionerates have been designated as Common
Adjudicating Authority (CAA) in respect of show cause notices issued by Directorate General
of GST Intelligence (DGGI). The said circular has specified the procedure to be followed in
case of assigning such show cause notices to the Common Adjudicating Authority along with
their territorial jurisdiction. However, it does not specify the procedure related to review,
revision, and appeals for such Orders-in -Original (O-I-Os) passed by CAA.

2.        The matter has been examined in consultation with the Union Ministry of Law and
Justice which has clarified that section 107 of the CGST Act, 2017 provides a detailed
mechanism for handling the appeals by the Appellate authority and by exercising the same
power, the rules have also been framed with regard to appeal and review. Similarly, the
Reviewing Authority also has the power under the said section to review adjudication orders
passed by a CAA who is posted under the said reviewing authority.




                                                                  Page 1 of 3

3.        Similarly, section 108 of the CGST Act, 2017, provides a detailed mechanism for
revision of such orders.              Vide    notification No. 05/2020-Central tax dated 13                             th January, 2020, the

jurisdictional  Principal  Commissioner  or  Commissioner,  as  the  case  may  be,  has  been
authorized  as  revisional  authority  for  decisions  or  orders  passed  by Additional  or  Joint
Commissioner of Central Tax who are subordinate to him.

4.        Therefore, to ensure uniformity in procedure for review, revision, and appeal against the
Orders-in-Original (O-I-Os) adjudicated by Common Adjudicating Authorities, it is hereby
clarified that:

            a)    Review under Section 107 of the CGST Act, 2017:                                        The Principal Commissioner
                  or Commissioner of Central Tax under whom the Common Adjudicating Authority
                  (Additional/ Joint Commissioner) is posted shall be the reviewing authority in
                  respect of such O-I-Os.

            b)    Revisional Power under Section 108 of the CGST Act, 2017:                                                      The Principal
                  Commissioner  or  Commissioner  of  Central  Tax  under  whom  the  Common
                  Adjudicating Authority (Additional/ Joint Commissioner) is posted shall be the
                  revisional authority in respect of such O-I-Os.

            c)    Appeal Procedure under Section 107 of the CGST Act, 2017:                                                   Appeals against
                  the order of Common Adjudicating Authority (Additional/Joint Commissioner)
                  shall  lie  before  the  Commissioner  (Appeals)  corresponding  to  the  territorial
                  jurisdiction of the Principal Commissioner or the Commissioner of Central Tax,
                  under  whom   the  said   Common  Adjudicating  Authority   (Additional/   Joint
                  Commissioner) is posted, as specified in Table III of notification No. 02/2017-
                  Central tax dated 19            th June, 2017.

            d)    Department's  Representation  in  Appeals:                                    The  Principal  Commissioner  or
                  Commissioner of Central Tax of such Commissionerate under whom the Common
                  Adjudicating Authority (Additional/Joint Commissioner) is posted shall represent
                  the department in appeal proceedings against the O-I-Os passed by such Common
                  Adjudicating Authority (Additional/ Joint Commissioner) and accordingly may
                  appoint any officer subordinate to him to be the designated officer for filing
                  departmental appeals.





                                                                   Page 2 of 3

             e)    The reviewing or revisional authority for such orders may seek comments on the
                   O-I-O from the concerned DGGI formation before proceeding to decide on the
                   order passed by the CAA.

5.        It is requested that suitable trade notices may be issued to publicize the contents of this
circular.

6.        Difficulty, if any, in the implementation of the above instructions may please be brought
to the notice of the Board.

                                                                                                                                       Yours faithfully,





                                                                                                                                        (Gaurav Singh)

                                                                                                                              Commissioner (GST)




































                                                                         Page 3 of 3
