Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of
Financial Statements*

The following is the text of the ‘Framework for the Preparation and Presentation
of  Financial  Statements’  issued  by  the  Accounting  Standards  Board  of  the
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.

Introduction

Purpose and Status

1.    This Framework sets out the concepts that underlie the preparation and
presentation  of  financial  statements  for  external  users.  The  purpose  of  the
Framework is to:

      (a)      assist  preparers  of  financial  statements  in  applying  Accounting
               Standards and in dealing with topics that have yet to form the subject
               of an Accounting Standard;

      (b)      assist the Accounting Standards Board in the development of future
               Accounting  Standards  and  in  its  review  of  existing  Accounting
               Standards;

      (c)      assist the Accounting Standards Board in promoting harmonisation
               of regulations, accounting standards and procedures relating to the
               preparation and presentation of financial statements by providing a
               basis for reducing the number of alternative accounting treatments
               permitted by Accounting Standards;

      (d)      assist  auditors  in  forming  an  opinion  as  to  whether  financial
               statements conform with Accounting Standards;

      (e)      assist users of financial statements in interpreting the information
               contained  in  financial  statements  prepared  in  conformity  with
               Accounting Standards; and

      (f)      provide  those  who  are  interested  in  the  work  of  the  Accounting
               Standards   Board   with   information   about   its   approach   to   the
               formulation of Accounting Standards.


* Issued in July 2000.
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

2.    This Framework is not an Accounting Standard and hence does not define
standards for any particular measurement or disclosure issue. Nothing in this
Framework overrides any specific Accounting Standard.

3.    The Accounting Standards Board recognises that in a limited number of
cases  there  may  be  a  conflict  between  the  Framework  and  an  Accounting
Standard. In those cases where there is a conflict, the requirements of the
Accounting Standard prevail over those of the Framework. As, however, the
Accounting   Standards   Board   will   be   guided   by   the   Framework   in   the
development of future Standards and in its review of existing Standards, the
number of cases of conflict between the Framework and Accounting Standards
will diminish through time.

4.    The  Framework  will  be  revised  from  time  to  time  on  the  basis  of  the
experience of the Accounting Standards Board of working with it.

Scope

5.    The Framework deals with:

      (a)    the objective of financial statements;

      (b)    the   qualitative   characteristics   that   determine   the   usefulness   of
             information provided in financial statements;

      (c)    definition, recognition and measurement of the elements from which
             financial statements are constructed; and

      (d)    concepts of capital and capital maintenance.

6.    The Framework is concerned with general purpose financial statements
(hereafter referred to as ‘financial statements’). Such financial statements are
prepared and presented at least annually and are directed toward the common
information needs of a wide range of users. Some of these users may require,
and have the power to obtain, information in addition to that contained in the
financial  statements.  Many  users,  however,  have  to  rely  on  the  financial
statements  as  their major source  of  financial  information  and  such  financial
statements should, therefore, be prepared and presented with their needs in
view.   Special   purpose   financial   reports,   for   example,           prospectuses   and
computations  prepared  for  taxation  purposes,  are  outside  the  scope  of  this
Framework. Nevertheless, the Framework may be applied in the preparation of
such special purpose reports where their requirements permit.

     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

7.    Financial  statements  form  part  of  the  process  of  financial  reporting.  A
complete  set  of  financial  statements  normally  includes  a  balance  sheet,  a
statement of profit and loss (also known as ‘income statement’), a cash flow
statement and those notes and other statements and explanatory material that
are  an  integral  part  of  the  financial  statements.  They  may  also  include
supplementary  schedules  and  information  based  on  or  derived  from,  and
expected to be read with, such statements. Such schedules and supplementary
information may deal, for example, with financial information about business and
geographical segments, and disclosures about the effects of changing prices.
Financial statements do not, however, include such items as reports by directors,
statements by the chairman, discussion and analysis by management and similar
items that may be included in a financial or annual report.

8.    The  Framework  applies  to  the  financial  statements  of  all  reporting
enterprises engaged in commercial, industrial and business activities, whether in
the public or in the private sector. A reporting enterprise is an enterprise for
which there are users who rely on the financial statements as their major source
of financial information about the enterprise.

Users and Their Information Needs

9.    The users of financial statements include present and potential investors,
employees, lenders, suppliers and other trade creditors, customers, governments
and their agencies and the public. They use financial statements in order to
satisfy some of their information needs. These needs include the following:

      (a)      Investors. The providers of risk capital are concerned with the risk
               inherent in, and return provided by, their investments. They need
               information to help them determine whether they should buy, hold or
               sell. They are also interested in information which enables them to
               assess the ability of the enterprise to pay dividends.

      (b)      Employees.       Employees   and   their   representative   groups   are
               interested in information about the stability and profitability of their
               employers. They are also interested in information which enables
               them to assess the ability of the enterprise to provide remuneration,
               retirement benefits and employment opportunities.

      (c)      Lenders. Lenders are interested in information which enables them
               to determine whether their loans, and the interest attaching to them,
               will be paid when due.

     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements


      (d)      Suppliers and other trade creditors. Suppliers and other creditors are
               interested in information which enables them to determine whether
               amounts owing to them will be paid when due. Trade creditors are
               likely to be interested in an enterprise over a shorter period than
               lenders  unless  they  are  dependent  upon  the  continuance  of  the
               enterprise as a major customer.

      (e)      Customers.      Customers  have  an  interest  in  information  about  the
               continuance of an enterprise, especially when they have a long- term
               involvement with, or are dependent on, the enterprise.

      (f)      Governments and their agencies.             Governments and their agencies
               are  interested  in  the  allocation  of  resources  and,  therefore,  the
               activities of enterprises. They also require information in order to
               regulate the activities of enterprises and determine taxation policies,
               and to serve as the basis for determination of national income and
               similar statistics.

      (g)      Public. Enterprises affect members of the public in a variety of ways.
               For example, enterprises may make a substantial contribution to the
               local economy in many ways including the number of people they
               employ and their patronage of local suppliers. Financial statements
               may assist the public by providing information about the trends and
               recent developments in the prosperity of the enterprise and the range
               of its activities.

10.   While all of the information needs of these users cannot be met by financial
statements, there are needs which are common to all users. As providers of risk
capital to the enterprise, investors need more comprehensive information than
other users. The provision of financial statements that meet their needs will also
meet most of the needs of other users that financial statements can satisfy.

11.   The management of an enterprise has the responsibility for the preparation
and presentation of the financial statements of the enterprise. Management is
also interested in the information contained in the financial statements even
though it has access to additional management and financial information that
helps  it  carry  out  its  planning,  decision-making  and  control  responsibilities.
Management has the ability to determine the form and content of such additional
information in order to meet its own needs. The reporting of such information,
however, is beyond the scope of this Framework.

     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements
The Objective of Financial Statements

12.   The objective of financial statements is to provide information about the
financial position, performance and cash flows of an enterprise that is useful to a
wide range of users in making economic decisions.

13.   Financial statements prepared for this purpose meet the common needs of
most users. However, financial statements do not provide all the information that
users may need to make economic decisions since (a) they largely portray the
financial effects of past events, and (b) do not necessarily provide non-financial
information.

14.   Financial   statements   also   show   the   results   of   the   stewardship   of
management, or the accountability of management for the resources entrusted to
it.  Those  users  who  wish  to  assess  the  stewardship  or  accountability  of
management do so in order that they may make economic decisions; these
decisions may include, for example, whether to hold or sell their investment in
the enterprise or whether to reappoint or replace the management.

Financial Position, Performance and Cash Flows

15.   The economic decisions that are taken by users of financial statements
require an evaluation of the ability of an enterprise to generate cash and cash
equivalents  and  of  the  timing  and  certainty  of  their  generation.  This  ability
ultimately  determines,  for  example,  the  capacity  of  an  enterprise  to  pay  its
employees  and  suppliers,  meet  interest  payments,  repay  loans,  and  make
distributions  to  its  owners.  Users  are  better  able  to  evaluate  this  ability  to
generate cash and cash equivalents if they are provided with information that
focuses on the financial position, performance and cash flows of an enterprise.

16.   The  financial  position  of  an  enterprise  is  affected  by  the  economic
resources it controls, its financial structure, its liquidity and solvency,                 and   its
capacity to adapt to changes in the environment in which it operates. Information
about the economic resources controlled by the enterprise and its capacity in the
past to alter these resources is useful in predicting the ability of the enterprise to
generate cash and cash equivalents in the future. Information about financial
structure is useful in predicting future borrowing needs and how future profits and
cash flows will be distributed among those with an interest in the enterprise; it is
also useful in predicting how successful the enterprise is likely to be in raising
further finance. Information about liquidity and solvency is useful in predicting the
ability  of  the  enterprise  to  meet  its  financial  commitments  as  they  fall  due.
Liquidity refers to the availability of cash in the near future to meet financial
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

commitments over this period. Solvency refers to the availability of cash over the
longer term to meet financial commitments as they fall due.

17.   Information  about  the  performance  of  an  enterprise,  in  particular  its
profitability, is required in order to assess potential changes in the economic
resources that it is likely to control in the future. Information about variability of
performance is important in this respect. Information about performance is useful
in  predicting  the  capacity  of  the  enterprise  to  generate  cash  flows  from  its
existing  resource  base.  It  is  also  useful  in  forming  judgements  about  the
effectiveness with which the enterprise might employ additional resources.

18.   Information concerning cash flows of an enterprise is useful in order to
evaluate  its  investing,  financing  and  operating  activities  during  the  reporting
period. This information is useful in providing the users with a basis to assess the
ability of the enterprise to generate cash and cash equivalents and the needs of
the enterprise to utilise those cash flows.

19.   Information about financial position is primarily provided in a balance sheet.
Information about performance is primarily provided in a statement of profit and
loss. Information about cash flows is provided in the financial statements by
means of a cash flow statement.

20.   The component parts of the financial statements are interrelated because
they reflect different aspects of the same transactions or other events. Although
each statement provides information that is different from the others, none is
likely to serve only a single purpose nor to provide all the information necessary
for particular needs of users.

Notes and Supplementary Schedules

21.   The financial statements also contain notes and supplementary schedules
and other information. For example, they may contain additional information that
is relevant to the needs of users about the items in the balance sheet and
statement of profit and loss. They may include disclosures about the risks and
uncertainties  affecting  the  enterprise  and  any  resources  and  obligations  not
recognised in the balance sheet (such as mineral reserves). Information about
business and geographical segments and the effect of changing prices on the
enterprise may also be provided in the form of supplementary information.



     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements
Underlying Assumptions

Accrual Basis

22.   In order to meet their objectives, financial statements are prepared on the
accrual basis of accounting. Under this basis, the effects of transactions and
other  events  are  recognised  when  they  occur  (and  not  as  cash  or  a  cash
equivalent is received or paid) and they are recorded in the accounting records
and reported in the financial statements of the periods to which they relate.
Financial statements prepared on the accrual basis inform users not only of past
events involving the payment and receipt of cash but also of obligations to pay
cash in the future and of resources that represent cash to be received in the
future. Hence, they provide the type of information about past transactions and
other events that is most useful to users in making economic decisions.

Going Concern

23.   The financial statements are normally prepared on the assumption that an
enterprise is a going concern and will continue in operation for the foreseeable
future. Hence, it is assumed that the enterprise has neither the intention nor the
need to liquidate or curtail materially the scale of its operations; if such an
intention or need exists, the financial statements may have to be prepared on a
different basis and, if so, the basis used is disclosed.

Consistency

24.   In  order  to  achieve  comparability  of  the  financial  statements  of  an
enterprise through time, the accounting policies are followed consistently from
one period to another; a change in an accounting policy is made only in certain
exceptional circumstances.

Qualitative Characteristics of Financial Statements

25.   Qualitative  characteristics  are  the  attributes  that  make  the  information
provided in financial statements useful to users. The four principal qualitative
characteristics are understandability, relevance, reliability and comparability.

Understandability

26.   An essential quality of the information provided in financial statements is
that it must be readily understandable by users. For this purpose, it is assumed
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

that users have a reasonable knowledge of business and economic activities and
accounting  and  study  the  information  with  reasonable  diligence.  Information
about  complex  matters  that  should  be  included  in  the  financial  statements
because of its relevance to the economic decision-making needs of users should
not be excluded merely on the ground that it may be too difficult for certain users
to understand.

Relevance

27.   To be useful, information must be relevant to the decision-making needs of
users. Information has the quality of relevance when it influences the economic
decisions of users by helping them evaluate past, present or future events or
confirming, or correcting, their past evaluations.

28.   The predictive and confirmatory roles of information are interrelated. For
example, information about the current level and structure of asset holdings has
value to users when they endeavour to predict the ability of the enterprise to take
advantage of opportunities and its ability to react to adverse situations. The same
information plays a confirmatory role in respect of past predictions about, for
example, the way in which the enterprise would be structured or the outcome of
planned operations.

29.   Information  about  financial  position  and  past  performance  is  frequently
used as the basis for predicting future financial position and performance and
other matters in which users are directly interested, such as dividend and wage
payments, share price movements and the ability of the enterprise to meet its
commitments as they fall due. To have predictive value, information need not be
in the form of an explicit forecast. The ability to make predictions from financial
statements is enhanced, however, by the manner in which information on past
transactions and events is displayed. For example, the predictive value of the
statement of profit and loss is         enhanced if unusual, abnormal and infrequent
items of income and expense are separately disclosed.

Materiality

30.   The relevance of information is affected by its materiality. Information is
material  if  its  misstatement  (i.e.,  omission  or  erroneous  statement)  could
influence the economic decisions of users taken on the basis of the financial
information. Materiality depends on the size and nature of the item or error,
judged in the particular circumstances of its misstatement. Materiality provides a
threshold or cut-off point rather than being a primary qualitative characteristic
which the information must have if it is to be useful.
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

Reliability

31.   To be useful, information must also be reliable. Information has the quality
of reliability when it is free from material error and bias and can be depended
upon by users to represent faithfully that which it either purports to represent or
could reasonably be expected to represent.

32.   Information may be relevant but so unreliable in nature or representation
that its recognition may be potentially misleading. For example, if the validity and
amount of a claim for damages under a legal action against the enterprise are
highly uncertain, it may be inappropriate for the enterprise to recognise the
amount of the claim in the balance sheet, although it may be appropriate to
disclose the amount and circumstances of the claim.

Faithful Representation

33.   To be reliable, information must represent faithfully the transactions and
other events it either purports to represent or could reasonably be expected to
represent. Thus, for example, a balance sheet should represent faithfully the
transactions and other events that result in assets, liabilities and equity of the
enterprise at the reporting date which meet the recognition criteria.

34.   Most financial information is subject to some risk of being less than a
faithful representation of that which it purports to portray. This is not due to bias,
but rather to inherent difficulties either in identifying the transactions and other
events  to  be  measured  or  in  devising  and  applying  measurement  and
presentation techniques that can convey messages that correspond with those
transactions  and events.  In certain  cases,  the measurement of  the  financial
effects  of  items  could  be  so  uncertain  that  enterprises  generally  would  not
recognise  them  in  the  financial  statements;  for  example,  although  most
enterprises generate goodwill internally over time, it is usually difficult to identify
or measure that goodwill reliably. In other cases, however, it may be relevant to
recognise items and to disclose the risk of error surrounding their recognition and
measurement.

Substance Over Form

35.   If information is to represent faithfully the transactions and other events that
it purports to represent, it is necessary that they are accounted for and presented
in accordance with their substance and economic reality and not merely their
legal  form.  The  substance  of  transactions  or  other  events  is  not  always
consistent with that which is apparent from their legal or contrived form. For
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

example,  where  rights  and  beneficial  interest  in  an  immovable  property  are
transferred  but  the  documentation  and  legal  formalities  are  pending,  the
recording of acquisition/disposal (by the transferee and transferor respectively)
would in substance represent the transaction entered into.

Neutrality

36.   To be reliable, the information contained in financial statements must be
neutral, that is, free from bias. Financial statements are not neutral if, by the
selection or presentation of information, they influence the making of a decision
or judgement in order to achieve a predetermined result or outcome.

Prudence

37.   The   preparers   of   financial   statements   have   to   contend   with   the
uncertainties that inevitably surround many events and circumstances, such as
the collectability of receivables, the probable useful life of plant and machinery,
and the warranty claims that may occur. Such uncertainties are recognised by
the disclosure of their nature and extent and by the exercise of prudence in the
preparation of the financial statements. Prudence is the inclusion of a degree of
caution  in  the  exercise  of  the  judgements  needed  in  making  the  estimates
required under conditions of uncertainty, such that assets or income are not
overstated and liabilities or expenses are not understated. However, the exercise
of prudence does not allow, for example, the creation of hidden reserves or
excessive provisions, the deliberate understatement of assets or income, or the
deliberate  overstatement  of         liabilities  or  expenses,  because  the  financial
statements would then not be neutral and, therefore, not have the quality of
reliability.

Completeness

38.   To be reliable, the information in financial statements must be complete
within the bounds of materiality and cost. An omission can cause information to
be false or misleading and thus unreliable and deficient in terms of its relevance.

Comparability

39.   Users must be able to compare the financial statements of an enterprise
through time in order to identify trends in its financial position, performance and
cash flows. Users must also be able to compare the financial statements of
different  enterprises  in  order  to  evaluate  their  relative  financial  position,
performance  and  cash  flows.  Hence,  the  measurement  and  display  of  the
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

financial effects of like transactions and other events must be carried out in a
consistent way throughout an enterprise and over time for that enterprise and in
a consistent way for different enterprises.

40.   An important implication of the qualitative characteristic of comparability is
that users be informed of the accounting policies employed in the preparation of
the financial statements, any changes in those policies and the effects of such
changes. Users need to be able to identify differences between the accounting
policies for like transactions and other events used by the same enterprise from
period  to  period  and  by  different  enterprises.  Compliance  with  Accounting
Standards,  including  the  disclosure          of  the  accounting  policies  used  by  the
enterprise, helps to achieve comparability.

41.   The need for comparability should not be confused with mere uniformity
and should not be allowed to become an impediment to the introduction of
improved accounting standards. It is not appropriate for an enterprise to continue
accounting in the same manner for a transaction or other event if the policy
adopted is not in keeping with the qualitative characteristics of relevance and
reliability. It is also inappropriate for an enterprise to leave its accounting policies
unchanged when more relevant and reliable alternatives exist.

42.   Users wish to compare the financial position, performance and cash flows
of an enterprise over time. Hence, it is important that the financial statements
show corresponding information for the preceding period(s).

Constraints on Relevant and Reliable Information

Timeliness

43.   If  there  is  undue  delay  in  the  reporting  of  information  it  may  lose  its
relevance.  Management  may  need  to  balance  the  relative  merits  of  timely
reporting and the provision of reliable information. To provide information on a
timely  basis  it  may  often  be  necessary  to  report  before  all  aspects  of  a
transaction or other event are known, thus impairing reliability. Conversely, if
reporting is delayed until all aspects are known, the information may be highly
reliable but of little use to users who have had to make decisions in the interim.
In  achieving  a  balance  between  relevance  and  reliability,  the  overriding
consideration is how best to satisfy the information needs of users.

Balance between Benefit and Cost

44.   The balance between benefit and cost is a pervasive constraint rather than
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

a qualitative characteristic. The benefits derived from information should exceed
the  cost  of  providing  it.  The  evaluation  of  benefits  and  costs  is,  however,
substantially a judgmental process. Furthermore, the costs do not necessarily fall
on those users who enjoy the benefits. Benefits may also be enjoyed by users
other than those for whom the information is prepared. For these reasons, it is
difficult  to  apply  a  cost-benefit  test  in  any  particular  case.  Nevertheless,
standard-setters in particular, as well as the preparers and users of financial
statements, should be aware of this constraint.

Balance between Qualitative Characteristics

45.   In practice, a balancing, or trade-off, between qualitative characteristics is
often necessary. Generally the aim is to achieve an appropriate balance among
the characteristics in order to meet the objective of financial statements. The
relative  importance  of  the  characteristics  in  different  cases  is  a  matter  of
professional judgment.

True and Fair View

46.   Financial statements are frequently described as showing a true and fair
view of the financial position, performance and cash flows of an enterprise.
Although  this  Framework  does  not  deal  directly  with  such  concepts,  the
application   of   the   principal   qualitative   characteristics  and   of   appropriate
accounting standards normally results in financial statements that convey what is
generally understood as a true and fair view of such information.

The Elements of Financial Statements

47.   Financial statements portray the financial effects of transactions and other
events  by  grouping  them  into  broad  classes  according  to  their  economic
characteristics.  These  broad  classes  are  termed  the  elements  of  financial
statements.  The  elements  directly  related  to  the  measurement  of  financial
position in the balance sheet are assets, liabilities and equity. The elements
directly related to the measurement of performance in the statement of profit and
loss  are  income  and  expenses.  The  cash  flow  statement  usually  reflects
elements of statement of profit and loss and changes in balance sheet elements;
accordingly,  this  Framework  identifies  no  elements  that  are  unique  to  this
statement.

48.   The presentation of these elements in the balance sheet and the statement
of profit and loss involves a process of sub-classification. For example, assets
and liabilities may be classified by their nature or function in the business of the
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

enterprise in order to display information in the manner most useful to users for
purposes of making economic decisions.

Financial Position

49.   The elements directly related to the measurement of financial position are
assets, liabilities and equity. These are defined as follows:

      (a)      An asset is a resource controlled by the enterprise as a result of past
               events from which future economic benefits are expected to flow to
               the enterprise.

      (b)      A liability is a present obligation of the enterprise arising from past
               events, the settlement of which is expected to result in an outflow
               from the enterprise of resources embodying economic benefits.

      (c)      Equity    is the residual interest in the assets of the enterprise after
               deducting all its liabilities.

50.   The definitions of an asset and a liability identify their essential features but
do  not  attempt  to  specify  the  criteria  that  need  to  be  met  before  they  are
recognised in the balance sheet. Thus, the definitions embrace items that are not
recognised as assets or liabilities in the balance sheet because they do not
satisfy the criteria for recognition discussed in paragraphs 81 to 97. In particular,
the expectation that future economic benefits will flow to or from an enterprise
must be sufficiently certain to meet the probability criterion in paragraph 82
before an asset or liability is recognised.

51.   In assessing whether an item meets the definition of an asset, liability or
equity,  consideration  needs  to  be  given  to  its  underlying  substance  and
economic reality and not merely its legal form. Thus, for example, in the case of
hire purchase, the substance and economic reality are that the hire purchaser
acquires the economic benefits of the use of the asset in return for entering into
an obligation to pay for that right an amount approximating to the fair value of the
asset and the related finance charge. Hence, the hire purchase gives rise to
items that satisfy the definition of an asset and a liability and are recognised as
such in the hire purchaser’s balance sheet.

Assets

52.   The  future  economic  benefit  embodied  in  an  asset  is  the  potential  to
contribute, directly or indirectly, to the flow of cash and cash equivalents to the
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

enterprise. The potential may be a productive one that is part of the operating
activities of the enterprise. It may also take the form of con- vertibility into cash or
cash equivalents or a capability to reduce cash outflows, such as when an
alternative manufacturing process lowers the costs of production.

53.   An enterprise usually employs its assets to produce goods or services
capable of satisfying the wants or needs of customers; because these goods or
services can satisfy these wants or needs, customers are prepared to pay for
them  and  hence  contribute  to  the  cash  flows  of  the  enterprise.  Cash  itself
renders  a  service  to  the  enterprise  because  of  its  command  over  other
resources.

54.   The  future  economic  benefits  embodied  in  an  asset  may  flow  to  the
enterprise in a number of ways. For example, an asset may be:

      (a)    used singly or in combination with other assets in the production of
             goods or services to be sold by the enterprise;

      (b)    exchanged for other assets;

      (c)    used to settle a liability; or

      (d)    distributed to the owners of the enterprise.

55.   Many assets, for example, plant and machinery, have a physical form.
However, physical form is not essential to the existence of an asset; hence
patents and copyrights, for example, are assets if future economic benefits are
expected to flow from them and if they are controlled by the enterprise.

56.   Many assets, for example, receivables and property, are associated with
legal rights, including the right of ownership. In determining the existence of an
asset, the right of ownership is not essential; thus, for example, an item held
under a hire purchase is an asset of the hire purchaser since the hire purchaser
controls the benefits which are expected to flow from the item. Although the
capacity of an enterprise to control benefits is usually the result of legal rights, an
item may nonetheless satisfy the definition of an asset even when there is no
legal control. For example, know-how obtained from a development activity may
meet the definition of an asset when, by keeping that know-how secret, an
enterprise controls the benefits that are expected to flow from it.

57.   The assets of an enterprise result from past transactions or other past
events. Enterprises normally obtain assets by purchasing or producing them, but
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

other transactions or events may also generate assets; examples include land
received by an enterprise from government as part of a programme to encourage
economic growth in an area and the discovery of mineral deposits. Transactions
or other events expected to occur in the future do not in themselves give rise to
assets; hence, for example, an intention to purchase inventory does not, of itself,
meet the definition of an asset.

58.   There is a close association between incurring expenditure and obtaining
assets but the two do not necessarily coincide. Hence, when an enterprise incurs
expenditure,  this  may  provide  evidence  that  future  economic  benefits  were
sought but is not conclusive proof that an item satisfying the definition of an asset
has been obtained. Similarly, the absence of a related expenditure does not
preclude an item from satisfying the definition of an asset and thus becoming a
candidate for recognition in the balance sheet.

Liabilities

59.   An essential characteristic of a liability is that the enterprise has a present
obligation. An obligation is a duty or responsibility to act or perform in a certain
way. Obligations may be legally enforceable as a consequence of a binding
contract or statutory requirement. This is normally the case, for example, with
amounts  payable  for  goods  and  services  received.  Obligations                   also  arise,
however, from normal business practice, custom and a desire to maintain good
business relations or act in an equitable manner. If, for example, an enterprise
decides as a matter of policy to rectify faults in its products even when these
become apparent after the warranty period has expired, the amounts that are
expected to be expended in respect of goods already sold are liabilities.

60.   A distinction needs to be drawn between a present obligation and a future
commitment. A decision by the management of an enterprise to acquire assets in
the future does not, of itself, give rise to a present obligation. An obligation
normally arises only when the asset is delivered or the enterprise enters into an
irrevocable agreement to acquire the asset. In the latter case, the irrevocable
nature of the agreement means that the economic consequences of failing to
honour the obligation, for example, because of the existence of a substantial
penalty, leave the enterprise with little, if any, discretion to avoid the outflow of
resources to another party.

61.   The settlement of a present obligation usually involves the enterprise giving
up resources embodying economic benefits in order to satisfy the claim of the
other party. Settlement of a present obligation may occur in a number of ways,
for example, by:
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements


      (a)      payment of cash;

      (b)      transfer of other assets;

      (c)      provision of services;

      (d)      replacement of that obligation with another obligation; or

      (e)      conversion of the obligation to equity.

An obligation may also be extinguished by other means, such as a creditor
waiving or forfeiting its rights.

62.   Liabilities  result  from  past  transactions  or  other  past  events.  Thus,  for
example, the acquisition of goods and the use of services give rise to trade
creditors (unless paid for in advance or on delivery) and the receipt of a bank
loan results in an obligation to repay the loan. An enterprise may also recognise
future rebates based on annual purchases by customers as liabilities; in this
case, the sale of the goods in the past is the transaction that gives rise to the
liability.

63.   Some liabilities can be measured only by using a substantial degree of
estimation. Such liabilities are commonly described as ‘provisions’. Examples
include  provisions  for  payments  to  be  made  under  existing  warranties  and
provisions to cover pension obligations.

Equity

64.   Although equity is defined in paragraph 49 as a residual, it may be sub-
classified  in  the  balance  sheet.  For  example,  funds  contributed  by  owners,
reserves  representing  appropriations  of  retained  earnings,  unappropriated
retained earnings and reserves representing capital maintenance adjustments
may be shown separately. Such classifications can be relevant to the decision-
making needs of the users of financial statements when they indicate legal or
other restrictions on the ability of the enterprise to distribute or otherwise apply its
equity. They may also reflect the fact that parties with ownership interests in an
enterprise  have  differing  rights  in  relation  to  the  receipt of  dividends  or the
repayment of capital.

65.   The creation of reserves is sometimes required by law in order to give the
enterprise and its creditors an added measure of protection from the effects of
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

losses. Reserves may also be created when tax laws grant exemptions from, or
reductions in, taxation liabilities if transfers to such reserves are made. The
existence and size of such reserves is information that can be relevant to the
decision-making needs of users. Transfers to such reserves are appropriations of
retained earnings rather than expenses.

66.   The amount at which equity is shown in the balance sheet is dependent on
the measurement of assets and liabilities. Normally, the aggregate amount of
equity only by coincidence corresponds with the aggregate market value of the
shares of the enterprise or the sum that could be raised by disposing of either the
net assets on a piecemeal basis or the enterprise as a whole on a going concern
basis.

67.   Commercial,  industrial  and  business  activities  are  often  undertaken  by
means of enterprises such as sole proprietorships, partnerships and trusts and
various types of government business undertakings. The legal and regulatory
framework for such enterprises is often different from that applicable to corporate
enterprises.  For  example,  unlike  corporate  enterprises,  in  the  case  of  such
enterprises, there may be few, if any, restrictions on the distribution to owners or
other beneficiaries of amounts included in equity. Nevertheless, the definition of
equity  and  the  other  aspects  of  this  Framework  that  deal  with  equity  are
appropriate for such enterprises.

Performance

68.   Profit is frequently used as a measure of performance or as the basis for
other  measures,  such  as  return  on  investment  or  earnings  per  share.  The
elements directly related to the measurement of profit are income and expenses.
The recognition and measurement of income and expenses, and hence profit,
depends in part on the concepts of capital and capital maintenance used by the
enterprise in preparing its financial statements. These concepts are discussed in
paragraphs 101 to 109.

69.   Income and expenses are defined as follows:

      (a)      Income is increase in economic benefits during the accounting period
               in the form of inflows or enhancements of assets or decreases of
               liabilities that result in increases in equity, other than those relating to
               contributions from equity participants.

      (b)      Expenses are decreases in economic benefits during the accounting
               period in the form of outflows or depletions of assets or incurrences
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

               of  liabilities  that  result  in  decreases  in  equity,  other  than  those
               relating to distributions to equity participants.

70.   The definitions of income and expenses identify their essential features but
do  not  attempt  to  specify  the  criteria  that  need  to  be  met  before  they  are
recognised in the statement of profit and loss. Criteria for recognition of income
and expenses are discussed in paragraphs 81 to 97.

71.   Income and expenses may be presented in the statement of profit and loss
in  different  ways  so  as  to  provide information  that is  relevant  for economic
decision-making. For example, it is a common practice to distinguish between
those items of income and expenses that arise in the course of the ordinary
activities of the enterprise and those that do not. This distinction is made on the
basis  that  the  source  of  an  item  is  relevant  in  evaluating  the  ability  of  the
enterprise  to  generate  cash  and  cash  equivalents  in  the  future.  When
distinguishing between items in this way, consideration needs to be given to the
nature of the enterprise and its operations. Items that arise from the ordinary
activities of one enterprise may be extraordinary in respect of another.

72.   Distinguishing between items of income and expense and combining them
in different ways also permits several measures of enterprise performance to be
displayed.  These  have  differing  degrees  of  inclusiveness.               For  example,  the
statement of profit and loss could display gross margin, profit from ordinary
activities before taxation, profit from ordinary activities after taxation, and net
profit.

Income

73.   The definition of income encompasses both revenue and gains. Revenue
arises in the course of the ordinary activities of an enterprise and is referred to by
a variety of different names including sales, fees, interest, dividends, royalties
and rent.

74.   Gains represent other items that meet the definition of income and may, or
may not, arise in the course of the ordinary activities of an enterprise. Gains
represent increases in economic benefits and as such are no different in nature
from  revenue.  Hence,  they are not  regarded  as  a  separate  element  in  this
Framework.
75.   The definition of income includes unrealised gains. Gains also include, for
example,  those  arising  on  the  disposal  of  fixed  assets.  When  gains  are
recognised  in  the  statement  of  profit  and  loss,  they  are  usually  displayed
separately  because  knowledge  of  them  is useful  for the  purpose of making
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

economic decisions.

76.   Various kinds of assets may be received or enhanced by income; examples
include cash,  receivables  and  goods  and  services  received  in  exchange  for
goods  and  services  supplied.  Income  may  also  result  in  the  settlement  of
liabilities. For example, an enterprise may provide goods and services to a lender
in settlement of an obligation to repay an outstanding loan.

Expenses

77.   The definition of expenses encompasses those expenses that arise in the
course of the ordinary activities of the enterprise, as well as losses. Expenses
that arise in the course of the ordinary activities of the enterprise include, for
example, cost of goods sold, wages, and depreciation. They take the form of an
outflow or depletion of assets or enhancement of liabilities.

78.   Losses represent other items that meet the definition of expenses and may,
or may not, arise in the course of the ordinary activities of the enterprise. Losses
represent decreases in economic benefits and as such they are no different in
nature  from  other  expenses.  Hence,  they  are  not  regarded  as  a  separate
element in this Framework.

79.   Losses include, for example, those resulting from disasters such as fire and
flood, as well as those arising on the disposal of fixed assets. The definition of
expenses also includes unrealised losses. When losses are recognised in the
statement  of  profit  and  loss,  they  are  usually  displayed  separately  because
knowledge of them is useful for the purpose of making economic decisions.

Capital Maintenance Adjustments

80.   The  revaluation  or  restatement  of  assets  and  liabilities  gives  rise  to
increases or decreases in equity. While these increases or decreases meet the
definition of income and expenses, they are not included in the statement of
profit and loss under certain concepts of capital maintenance. Instead, these
items are included in equity as capital maintenance adjustments or revaluation
reserves. These concepts of capital maintenance are discussed in paragraphs
101 to 109 of this Framework.

Recognition of the Elements of Financial Statements

81.   Recognition  is  the  process  of  incorporating  in  the  balance  sheet  or
statement of profit and loss an item that meets the definition of an element and
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

satisfies  the  criteria  for  recognition  set  out  in  paragraph  82.  It  involves  the
depiction of the item in words and by a monetary amount and the inclusion of
that amount in the totals of balance sheet or statement of profit and loss. Items
that satisfy the recognition criteria should be recognised in the balance sheet or
statement of profit and loss. The failure to recognise such items is not rectified by
disclosure of the accounting policies used nor by notes or explanatory material.

82.   An item that meets the definition of an element should be recognised if:

      (a)      it is probable that any future economic benefit associated with the
               item will flow to or from the enterprise; and

      (b)      the item has a cost or value that can be measured with reliability.

83.   In assessing whether an item meets these criteria and therefore qualifies
for recognition  in  the  financial  statements,  regard  needs  to  be  given  to  the
materiality  considerations  discussed  in  paragraph  30.  The  interrelationship
between  the  elements  means  that  an  item  that  meets  the  definition  and
recognition criteria for a particular element, for example, an asset, automatically
requires the recognition of another element, for example, income or a liability.

The Probability of Future Economic Benefits

84.   The concept of probability is used in the recognition criteria to refer to the
degree of uncertainty that the future economic benefits associated with the item
will flow to or from the enterprise. The concept is in keeping with the uncertainty
that   characterises   the   environment   in   which   an   enterprise   operates.
Assessments  of  the  degree  of  uncertainty  attaching  to  the  flow  of  future
economic benefits are made on the basis of the evidence available when the
financial  statements  are  prepared.  For  example,              when  it  is  probable  that  a
receivable will be realised, it is then justifiable, in the absence of any evidence to
the contrary, to recognise the receivable as an asset. For a large population of
receivables,  however,  some  degree  of  non-payment  is  normally  considered
probable; hence, an expense representing the expected reduction in economic
benefits is recognised.

Reliability of Measurement

85.   The second criterion for the recognition of an item is that it possesses a
cost or value that can be measured with reliability as discussed in paragraphs 31
to 38 of this Framework. In many cases, cost or value must be estimated; the
use of reasonable estimates is an essential part of the preparation of financial
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

statements  and  does  not  undermine  their  reliability.  When,  however,  a
reasonable estimate cannot be made, the item is not recognised in the balance
sheet or statement of profit and loss. For example, the damages payable in a
lawsuit may meet the definitions of both a liability and an expense as well as the
probability criterion for recognition; however, if it is not possible to measure the
claim reliably, it should not be recognised as a liability or as an expense.

86.   An item that, at a particular point in time, fails to meet the recognition
criteria in paragraph 82 may qualify for recognition at a later date as a result of
subsequent circumstances or events.

87.   An item that possesses the essential characteristics of an element but fails
to meet the criteria for recognition may nonetheless warrant disclosure in the
notes,  explanatory  material  or  supplementary  schedules.  This  is  appropriate
when knowledge of the item is considered to be relevant to the evaluation of the
financial position, performance and cash flows of an enterprise by the users of
financial statements. Thus, in the example given in paragraph 85, the existence
of the claim would need to be disclosed in the notes, explanatory material or
supplementary schedules.

Recognition of Assets

88.   An asset is recognised in the balance sheet when it is probable that the
future economic benefits associated with it will flow to the enterprise and the
asset has a cost or value that can be measured reliably.

89.   An asset is not recognised in the balance sheet when expenditure has been
incurred for which it is considered improbable that economic benefits will flow to
the enterprise beyond the current accounting period. Instead, such a transaction
results in the recognition of an expense in the statement of profit and loss. This
treatment does not imply either that the intention of management in incurring
expenditure  was  other  than  to  generate  future  economic  benefits  for  the
enterprise or that management was misguided. The only implication is that the
degree of certainty that economic benefits will flow to the enterprise beyond the
current accounting period is insufficient to warrant the recognition of an asset.

Recognition of Liabilities

90.   A liability is recognised in the balance sheet when it is probable that an
outflow of resources embodying economic benefits will result from the settlement
of a present obligation and the amount at which the settlement will take place
can  be  measured  reliably.  In  practice,  obligations  under  contracts  that  are
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

equally proportionately unperformed (for example, liabilities for inventory ordered
but not yet received) are generally not recognised as liabilities in the financial
statements. However, such obligations may meet the definition of liabilities and,
provided the recognition criteria are met in the particular circumstances, may
qualify for recognition. In such circumstances, recognition of liabilities entails
recognition of related assets or expenses.

Recognition of Income

91.   Income is recognised in the statement of profit and loss when an increase
in future economic benefits related to an increase in an asset or a decrease of a
liability has arisen that can be measured reliably. This means, in effect, that
recognition of income occurs simultaneously with the recognition of increases in
assets or decreases in liabilities (for example, the net increase in assets arising
on a sale of goods or services or the decrease in liabilities arising from the
waiver of a debt payable).

92.   The procedures normally adopted in practice for recognising income, for
example, the requirement that revenue should be earned, are applications of the
recognition criteria in this Framework. Such procedures are generally directed at
restricting the recognition as income to those items that can be measured reliably
and have a sufficient degree of certainty.

Recognition of Expenses

93.   Expenses  are  recognised  in  the  statement  of  profit  and  loss  when  a
decrease in future economic benefits related to a decrease in an asset or an
increase of a liability has arisen that can be measured reliably. This means, in
effect, that recognition of expenses occurs simultaneously with the recognition of
an increase of liabilities or a decrease in assets (for example, the accrual of
employees’ salaries or the depreciation of plant and machinery).

94.   Many expenses are recognised in the statement of profit and loss on the
basis of   a direct association between the costs incurred and the earning of
specific items of income. This process, commonly referred to as the matching of
costs  with  revenues,  involves  the  simultaneous  or  combined  recognition  of
revenues and expenses that result directly and jointly from the same transactions
or other events; for example, the various components of expense making up the
cost of goods sold are recognised at the same time as the income derived from
the sale of the goods. However, the application of the matching concept under
this Framework does not allow the recognition of items in the balance sheet
which do not meet the definition of assets or liabilities.
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements


95.   When economic benefits are expected to arise over several accounting
periods  and  the  association  with  income  can  only  be  broadly  or  indirectly
determined, expenses are recognised in the statement of profit and loss on the
basis of systematic and rational allocation procedures. This is often necessary in
recognising the expenses associated with the using up of assets such as plant
and machinery, goodwill, patents and trademarks; in such cases, the expense is
referred to as  depreciation or amortisation.  These  allocation  procedures  are
intended to recognise expenses in the accounting periods in which the economic
benefits associated with these items are consumed or expire.

96.   An expense is recognised immediately in the statement of profit and loss
when an expenditure produces no future economic benefits. An expense is also
recognised to the extent that future economic benefits from an                   expenditure do
not qualify, or cease to qualify, for recognition in the balance sheet as an asset.

97.   An expense is recognised in the statement of profit and loss in those cases
also where a liability is incurred without the recognition of an asset, for example,
in the case of a liability under a product warranty.

Measurement of the Elements of Financial Statements

98.   Measurement is the process of determining the monetary amounts at which
the elements of financial statements are to be recognised and carried in the
balance sheet and statement of profit and loss. This involves the selection of the
particular basis of measurement.

99.   A  number  of  different  measurement  bases  are  employed  to  different
degrees and in varying combinations in financial statements. They include the
following:

      (a)      Historical cost. Assets are recorded at the amount of cash or cash
               equivalents paid or the fair value of the other consideration given to
               acquire them at the time of their acquisition. Liabilities are recorded
               at the amount of proceeds received in exchange for the obligation, or
               in some circumstances (for example, income taxes), at the amounts
               of cash or cash equivalents expected to be paid to satisfy the liability
               in the normal course of business.

      (b)      Current cost.     Assets  are carried  at  the  amount  of  cash or cash
               equivalents that would have to be paid if the same or an equivalent
               asset   were   acquired   currently.   Liabilities   are   carried   at   the
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

               undiscounted amount of cash or cash equivalents that would be
               required to settle the obligation currently.

      (c)      Realisable (settlement) value. Assets are carried at the amount of
               cash or cash equivalents that could currently be obtained by selling
               the  asset  in  an  orderly  disposal.  Liabilities  are  carried  at  their
               settlement values, that is, the undiscounted amounts of cash or cash
               equivalents expected to be required to settle the liabilities in the
               normal course of business.

      (d)      Present value. Assets are carried at the present value of the future
               net cash inflows that the item is expected to generate in the normal
               course of business. Liabilities are carried at the present value of the
               future net cash outflows that are expected to be required to settle the
               liabilities in the normal course of business.

100. The  measurement  basis  most  commonly  adopted                       by  enterprises  in
preparing their financial statements is historical cost. This is usually combined
with other measurement bases. For example, inventories are usually carried at
the lower of cost and net realisable value and pension liabilities are carried at
their present  value.  Furthermore,  the  current cost  basis  may  be  used  as a
response to the inability of the historical cost accounting model to deal with the
effects of changing prices of non-monetary assets.

Concepts of Capital and Capital Maintenance

Concepts of Capital

101. Under a financial concept of capital, such as invested money or invested
purchasing power, capital is synonymous with the net assets or equity of the
enterprise. Under a physical concept of capital, such as operating capability,
capital is regarded as the productive capacity of the enterprise based on, for
example, units of output per day.

102. The selection of the appropriate concept of capital by an enterprise should
be based on the needs of the users of its financial statements. Thus, a financial
concept of capital should be adopted if the users of financial statements are
primarily concerned with the maintenance of nominal invested capital or the
purchasing power of invested capital. If, however, the main concern of users is
with  the  operating  capability  of  the enterprise,  a  physical  concept  of capital
should  be  used.  The  concept  chosen  indicates  the  goal  to  be  attained  in
determining profit, even though there may be some measurement difficulties in
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

making the concept operational.

Concepts of Capital Maintenance and the Determination of Profit

103. The  concepts  of  capital  described  in  paragraph  101  give  rise  to  the
following concepts of capital maintenance:

      (a)      Financial capital maintenance. Under this concept, a profit is earned
               only if the financial (or money) amount of the net assets at the end of
               the period exceeds the financial (or money) amount of net assets at
               the beginning of the period, after excluding any distributions to, and
               contributions  from,  owners  during  the  period.  Financial  capital
               maintenance can be measured in either nominal monetary units or
               units of constant purchasing power.

      (b)      Physical capital maintenance. Under this concept, a profit is earned
               only if the physical productive capacity (or operating capability) of the
               enterprise at the end of the period exceeds the physical productive
               capacity  at  the  beginning  of  the  period,  after  excluding  any
               distributions to, and contributions from, owners during the period.

104. The concept of capital maintenance is concerned with how an enterprise
defines the capital that it seeks to maintain. It provides the linkage between the
concepts of capital and the concepts of profit because it provides the point of
reference  by  which  profit  is measured;  it  is  a  prerequisite  for distinguishing
between an enterprise's return on capital and its return of capital; only inflows of
assets in excess of amounts needed to maintain capital can be regarded as profit
and therefore as a return on          capital. Hence, profit is the residual amount that
remains  after  expenses  (including  capital  maintenance  adjustments,  where
appropriate) have been deducted from income. If expenses exceed income, the
residual amount is a net loss.
105. The  physical  capital maintenance  concept  requires  the  adoption  of  the
current cost basis of measurement. The financial capital maintenance concept,
however,  does  not  require  the  use  of  a  particular  basis  of  measurement.
Selection of the basis under this concept is dependent on the type of financial
capital that the enterprise is seeking to maintain.

106. The principal difference between the two concepts of capital maintenance is
the treatment of the effects of changes in the prices of assets and liabilities of the
enterprise. In general terms, an enterprise has maintained its capital if it has as
much capital at the end of the period as it had at the beginning of the period. Any
amount over and above that required to maintain the capital at the beginning of
     Framework for the Preparation and Presentation of Financial Statements

the period is profit.

107. Under the concept of financial capital maintenance where capital is defined
in terms of nominal monetary units, profit represents the increase in nominal
money capital over the period. Thus, increases in the prices of assets held over
the period, conventionally referred to as holding gains, are, conceptually, profits.
They may not be recognised as such, however, until the assets are disposed of
in an exchange transaction. When the concept of financial capital maintenance is
defined  in  terms  of  constant  purchasing  power  units,  profit  represents  the
increase in invested purchasing power over the period. Thus, only that part of the
increase in the prices of assets that exceeds the increase in the general level of
prices is regarded as profit. The rest of the increase is treated as a capital
maintenance adjustment and, hence, as part of equity.

108. Under the concept of physical capital maintenance when capital is defined
in terms of the physical productive capacity, profit represents the increase in that
capital over the period. All price changes affecting the assets and liabilities of the
enterprise are viewed as changes in the measurement of the physical productive
capacity  of  the  enterprise;  hence,  they  are  treated  as  capital  maintenance
adjustments that are part of equity and not as profit.

109. The   selection   of   the   measurement   bases   and   concept   of   capital
maintenance will determine the accounting model used in the preparation of the
financial statements. Different accounting models exhibit different degrees of
relevance  and  reliability  and,  as  in  other  areas,  management  must  seek  a
balance between relevance and reliability. This Framework is applicable to a
range of accounting models and provides guidance on preparing and presenting
the financial statements under the chosen model.