Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards
(revised 2004)

Contents                                                                 Paragraph

FORMATION OF THE ACCOUNTING                                                             1
STANDARDS BOARD

OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE
ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD                                                               2

GENERAL PURPOSE  FINANCIAL STATEMENTS                                                              3

SCOPE OF ACCOUNTING STANDARDS                                                           4

PROCEDURE FOR ISSUING AN ACCOUNTING                                                5
STANDARD

COMPLIANCE WITH THE ACCOUNTING                                                             6
STANDARDS
Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards
(revised 2004)

The following is the text of the Preface to the Statements of Accounting
Standards  (revised  2004),  issued  by  the  Council  of  the  Institute  of
Chartered Accountants of India.

With the issuance of this revised Preface, the Preface to the Statements of
Accounting Standards, issued in January, 1979, stands superseded.

  1.    Formation of the Accounting Standards Board

1.1     The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), recognising the
        need to harmonise the diverse accounting policies and practices in use in
        India, constituted the Accounting Standards Board (ASB) on 21st April,
        1977.

1.2     The   composition   of   the   ASB   is   fairly   broad-based   and   ensures
        participation of all interest-groups in the standard-setting process. Apart
        from the elected members of the Council of the ICAI nominated on the
        ASB, the following are represented on the ASB:

        (i)   Nominee of the Central Government representing the Department of
              Company Affairs on the Council of the ICAI

       (ii)   Nominee of the Central Government representing the Office of the
              Comptroller and Auditor General of India on the Council of the ICAI

      (iii)   Nominee of the Central Government representing the Central Board
              of Direct Taxes on the Council of the ICAI

      (iv)    Representative of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of
              India

       (v)    Representative of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India

              Representatives   of   Industry   Associations   (1   from   Associated
              Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry  (ASSOCHAM),  1                       from
              Confederation  of  Indian  Industry  (CII)  and  1  from  Federation  of
              Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI)

      (vi)    Representative of Reserve Bank of India

      (vii)   Representative of Securities and Exchange Board of India
                  Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards

   (viii)      Representative of Controller General of Accounts

    (ix)       Representative of Central Board of Excise and Customs

     (x)       Representatives of Academic Institutions (1 from Universities and 1
               from Indian Institutes of Management)

    (xi)       Representative of Financial Institutions

    (xii)      Eminent professionals co-opted by the ICAI (they may be in practice
               or in industry, government, education, etc.)

   (xiii)      Chairman  of  the  Research  Committee  and  the  Chairman  of  the
               Expert Advisory Committee of the ICAI, if they are not otherwise
               members of the Accounting Standards Board

   (xiv)       Representative(s) of any other body, as considered appropriate by
               the ICAI

  2.    Objectives    and    Functions    of    the    Accounting
        Standards Board1

2.1     The following are the objectives of the Accounting Standards Board:

        (i)    To conceive of and suggest areas in which Accounting Standards
               need to be developed.

       (ii)    To formulate Accounting Standards through a process that is robust,
               comprehensive, and inclusive with a view to assisting the Council of
               the  ICAI  in  evolving  and  establishing  Accounting  Standards  to
               discharge its role of national standard-setter as follows:
                 •   To  recommend  Accounting  Standards  (Indian  Accounting
                     Standards  (Ind  AS)  and  Accounting  Standards  (AS))  to
                     Government of India for notification under relevant provisions
                     of  various  statutes,  such  as,  Companies  Act  2013,  Limited
                     Liability Partnership Act, 2008;
                •    To issue Accounting Standards for entities other than those

1 The Council at its 364th meeting held on 23-25 March, 2017, amended points 2.1 and
2.3 of this section of the preface,      thereafter,  point 2.1   was further amended by the
Council at its 391st meeting held on March 20, 2020 and 410th            meeting held on 23-24
March, 2022.


                  Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards

                     covered above.
     (iii)     To review, at regular intervals, the Accounting Standards from the
               point  of  view  of  changed  conditions,            practical  challenges  and
               implementation experience of the Accounting Standards, if any, and
               revise the same appropriately.
    (iv)       To  provide,  from  time  to  time,  interpretations  and  guidance                to
               support    implementation    of          Accounting    Standards          including
               publishing  education  material,  guidance  notes,  technical  guides,
               implementation guide, e-learning tools etc..
     (v)       To take adequate steps to enhance knowledge of the members and
               other   stakeholders   for   proper   implementation   of   Accounting
               Standards by conducting  workshops,  seminars,  train  the  trainers
               programs, and certificate course/ diploma course on Ind AS in India
               and abroad.
    (vi)       To co-ordinate with various Committees of the ICAI with regard to
               various issues in Accounting and Accounting Standards.
    (vii)      To contribute to the development of a single set of high quality
               globally accepted financial reporting standards for international use
               by IFRS Foundation.
   (viii)      To  collaborate  and  develop  mutually  beneficial  partnerships  with
               other  national  standard-setters  and  various  consultative/advisory
               forums  of  IFRS  Foundation  such  as  Asian-Oceanian  Standard-
               Setters   Group(AOSSG),   Emerging   Economies   Group   (EEG),
               International   Forum   of   Accounting   Standard-setters   (IFASS),
               Accounting  Standards  Advisory  Forum  (ASAF),  IFRS  Advisory
               Council,  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  of  US  (FASB),
               European Financial Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG) etc.
    (ix)       To  carry  out  such  other  functions  relating  to  Accounting  and
               Accounting Standards.

2.2     The main function of the ASB is to formulate Accounting Standards so
        that  such  standards  may  be  established  by  the  ICAI  in  India.  While
        formulating   the   Accounting   Standards,   the   ASB   will   take   into
        consideration   the  applicable   laws,   customs,   usages   and   business
        environment prevailing in India.

2.3     The ICAI, being a full-fledged member of the International Federation of
        Accountants  (IFAC),  is  expected,  inter  alia,  to  actively  promote  the
        International Accounting Standards Board’s (IASB) pronouncements in
                  Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards

        the country with a view to facilitate global harmonisation of accounting
        standards. Accordingly, while formulating the Accounting Standards, the
        ASB  will  give  due  consideration  to  International  Financial  Reporting
        Standards (IFRSs) issued by the IASB and try to integrate them, to the
        extent possible, in the light of the conditions and practices prevailing in
        India.

2.4     The Accounting Standards are issued under the authority of the Council
        of the ICAI. The ASB has also been entrusted with the responsibility of
        propagating the Accounting Standards and of persuading the concerned
        parties to adopt them in the preparation and presentation of financial
        statements. The ASB will provide interpretations and guidance on issues
        arising  from  Accounting  Standards.  The  ASB  will  also  review  the
        Accounting Standards at periodical intervals and, if necessary, revise the
        same.

  3.    General Purpose Financial Statements

3.1     For discharging its functions, the ASB will keep in view the purposes and
        limitations of financial statements and the attest function of the auditors.
        The  ASB  will  enumerate  and  describe  the  basic  concept  to  which
        accounting  principles  should  be  oriented  and  state  the  accounting
        principles to which the practices and procedures should conform.

3.2     The ASB will clarify the terms commonly used in financial statements and
        suggest improvements in the terminology wherever necessary. The ASB
        will  examine  the  various  current  alternative  practices  in  vogue  and
        endeavour  to  eliminate  or  reduce  alternatives  within  the  bounds  of
        rationality.

3.3     Accounting  Standards  are  designed  to  apply  to  the  general  purpose
        financial statements and other financial reporting, which are subject to the
        attest function of the members of the ICAI. Accounting Standards apply in
        respect of any enterprise (whether organised in corporate, co-operative2
        or other forms) engaged in commercial, industrial or business activities,
        irrespective of whether it is profit oriented or it is established for charitable
        or religious purposes. Accounting Standards will not, however, apply to
        enterprises only carrying on the activities which are not of commercial,
        industrial or business nature, (e.g., an activity of collecting donations and

2 With this issuance of this revised Preface, General Clarification (GC) - 12/2002, Applicability
of Accounting Standards to Co-operative Societies, issued by the Accounting Standards
Board in October 2002, stands superseded.
                  Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards

        giving them to flood affected people). Exclusion of an enterprise from the
        applicability of the Accounting Standards would be permissible only if no
        part of the activity of such enterprise is commercial, industrial or business
        in nature. Even if a very small proportion of the activities of an enterprise
        is  considered  to  be  commercial,  industrial  or  business  in  nature,  the
        Accounting  Standards  would  apply  to  all  its  activities  including  those
        which are not commercial, industrial or business in nature3.

3.4     The term ‘General Purpose Financial Statements’ includes balance sheet,
        statement of profit and loss, a cash flow statement (wherever applicable)
        and statements and explanatory notes which form part thereof, issued for
        the use of various stakeholders, Governments and their agencies and the
        public.  References  to  financial  statements  in  this  Preface  and  in  the
        standards issued from time to time will be construed to refer to General
        Purpose Financial Statements.

3.5     Responsibility for the preparation of financial statements and for adequate
        disclosure is that of the management of the enterprise. The auditor’s
        responsibility  is  to  form  his  opinion  and  report  on  such  financial
        statements.

4.      Scope of Accounting Standards

4.1     Efforts  will  be  made  to  issue  Accounting  Standards  which  are  in
        conformity with the provisions of the applicable laws, customs, usages
        and business environment in India. However, if a particular Accounting
        Standard is found to be not in conformity with law, the provisions of the
        said law will prevail and the financial statements should be prepared in
        conformity with such law.

4.2     The  Accounting  Standards  by  their  very  nature  cannot  and  do  not
        override   the   local   regulations   which   govern   the   preparation   and
        presentation of financial statements in the country. However, the ICAI will
        determine the extent of disclosure to be made in financial statements and
        the  auditor’s  report  thereon.  Such  disclosure  may  be  by  way  of
        appropriate  notes  explaining  the  treatment  of  particular  items.  Such
        explanatory notes will be only in the nature of clarification and therefore
        need  not  be  treated  as  adverse  comments  on  the  related  financial
        statements.


3 With this issuance of this revised Preface, Announcement on ‘Applicability of Accounting
Standards  to  Charitable  and/or  Religious    Organisations’,  approved    by    the  Council
(published in ‘The Chartered Accountant’, September 1995 (page 79)), stands superseded.
                  Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards

4.3     The Accounting Standards are intended to apply only to items which are
        material.  Any  limitations  with  regard  to  the  applicability  of  a  specific
        Accounting Standard will be made clear by the ICAI from time to time.
        The date from which a particular Standard will come into effect, as well as
        the class of enterprises to which it will apply, will also be specified by the
        ICAI.  However,  no  standard  will  have  retroactive  application,  unless
        otherwise stated.

4.4     The Institute will use its best endeavours to persuade the Government,
        appropriate authorities, industrial and business community to adopt the
        Accounting Standards in order to achieve uniformity in preparation and
        presentation of financial statements.

4.5     In formulation of Accounting Standards, the emphasis would be on laying
        down  accounting  principles and  not  detailed  rules for application  and
        implementation thereof.

4.6     The Standards formulated by the ASB include paragraphs in bold italic
        type and plain type, which have equal authority. Paragraphs in bold italic
        type indicate the main principles. An individual standard should be read in
        the context of the objective stated in that standard and this Preface.

4.7     The  ASB  may  consider  any  issue  requiring  interpretation  on  any
        Accounting Standard. Interpretations will be issued under the authority of
        the  Council.  The  authority  of  Interpretation  is  the  same  as  that  of
        Accounting Standard to which it relates.

5.      Procedure for Issuing an Accounting Standard

Broadly,   the   following   procedure   is   adopted   for   formulating   Accounting
Standards:

5.1     The ASB determines the broad areas in which Accounting Standards
        need to be formulated and the priority in regard to the selection thereof.

5.2     In the preparation of Accounting Standards, the ASB will be assisted by
        Study Groups constituted to consider specific subjects. In the formation of
        Study  Groups,  provision  will  be  made  for  wide  participation  by  the
        members of the Institute and others.

5.3     The draft of the proposed standard will normally include the following:

        (a)    Objective of the Standard,

        (b)    Scope of the Standard,
                  Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards



        (c)    Definitions of the terms used in the Standard,

        (d)    Recognition and measurement principles, wherever applicable,

        (e)    Presentation and disclosure requirements.

5.4     The ASB will consider the preliminary draft prepared by the Study Group
        and if any revision of the draft is required on the basis of deliberations, the
        ASB will make the same or refer the same to the Study Group.

5.5     The ASB will circulate the draft of the Accounting Standard to the Council
        members  of  the  ICAI  and  the  following  specified  bodies  for  their
        comments*:

        (i)    Department of Company Affairs (DCA)

       (ii)    Comptroller and Auditor General of India (C&AG)

       (iii)   Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)

       (iv)    The Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI)

       (v)     The Institute of Company Secretaries of India (ICSI)

       (vi)    Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry (ASSOCHAM),
               Confederation  of  Indian  Industry  (CII)  and  Federation  of  Indian
               Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI)

      (vii)    Reserve Bank of India (RBI)

     (viii)    Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)

       (ix)    Standing Conference of Public Enterprises (SCOPE)

       (x)     Indian Banks’ Association (IBA)

       (xi)    Any other body considered relevant by the ASB keeping in view the
               nature of the Accounting Standard

5.6     The ASB will hold a meeting with the representatives of specified bodies
        to ascertain their views on the draft of the proposed Accounting Standard.
        On   the   basis   of   comments   received   and   discussion   with   the
        representatives of specified bodies, the ASB will finalise the Exposure
        Draft of the proposed Accounting Standard*.

* The Council of ICAI, at its 291st meeting held on December 16-17, 2009 decided that
procedures in paragraph 5.5 and 5.6 need not be followed in respect of Accounting Standards
issued hithertofore.
                  Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards


5.7     The  Exposure  Draft  of  the  proposed  Standard  will  be  issued  for
        comments by the members of the Institute and the public. The Exposure
        Draft will specifically be sent to specified bodies (as listed above), stock
        exchanges, and other interest groups, as appropriate.

5.8     After taking into consideration the comments received, the draft of the
        proposed Standard will be finalised by the ASB and submitted to the
        Council of the ICAI.

5.9     The  Council  of  the  ICAI  will  consider the  final  draft  of  the  proposed
        Standard, and if found necessary, modify the same in consultation with
        the ASB. The Accounting Standard on the relevant subject will then be
        issued by the ICAI.

5.10    For  a  substantive  revision  of  an  Accounting  Standard,  the  procedure
        followed for formulation of a new Accounting Standard, as detailed above,
        will be followed.

5.11    Subsequent to issuance of an Accounting Standard, some aspect(s) may
        require revision which are not substantive in nature. For this purpose, the
        ICAI  may  make  limited  revision  to  an  Accounting  Standard.  The
        procedure followed for the limited revision will substantially be the same
        as that to be followed for formulation of an Accounting Standard, ensuring
        that sufficient opportunity is given to various interest groups and general
        public to react to the proposal for limited revision.


6.      Compliance with the Accounting Standards

6.1     The Accounting Standards will be mandatory from the respective date(s)
        mentioned in the Accounting Standard(s). The mandatory status of an
        Accounting Standard implies that while discharging their attest functions,
        it will be the duty of the members of the Institute to examine whether the
        Accounting  Standard  is  complied  with  in  the  presentation  of  financial
        statements covered by their audit. In the event of any deviation from the
        Accounting Standard, it will be their duty to make adequate disclosures in
        their audit reports so that the users of financial statements may be aware
        of such deviation.

6.2     Ensuring compliance with the Accounting Standards while preparing the
        financial  statements  is  the  responsibility  of  the  management  of  the
                  Preface to the Statements of Accounting Standards

        enterprise.   Statutes   governing   certain   enterprises   require   of   the
        enterprises   that   the   financial   statements   should   be   prepared   in
        compliance  with  the  Accounting  Standards,  e.g.,  the  Companies  Act,
        19564    (section  211),  and  the  Insurance  Regulatory  and  Development
        Authority (Preparation of Financial Statements and Auditor’s Report of
        Insurance Companies) Regulations, 2000.

6.3     Financial  Statements  cannot  be  described  as  complying  with  the
        Accounting Standards unless they comply with all the requirements of
        each applicable Standard.



































4 With regard to the reference to Companies Act, 1956, relevant section of Companies Act,
2013, shall be referred.