90
Accounting   Standard    (AS ) 5
(revised1997)

Net   Profit   or  Loss    for  the  Period,
Prior   Period     Items    and
Changes      in  Accounting        Policies

Contents


OBJECTIVE
SCOPE                                            Paragraphs 1-3
DEFINITIONS                                                   4
NET PROFIT   OR  LOSS  FOR  THE  PERIOD                    5-27
Extraordinary Items                                        8-11
ProfitorLoss from Ordinary  Activities                    12-14
PriorPeriod Items                                         15-19
Changes inAccounting  Estimates                           20-27
CHANGES    IN ACCOUNTING     POLICIES                     28-33
                                             Net  Profitor  Loss  forthe  Period   85
Accounting           Standard          (AS    ) 5*
(revised   1997)

Net    Profit     or   Loss      for   the    Period,
Prior     Period       Items      and
Changes         in   Accounting           Policies


(Thi s Accounting     Standard    includes    paragraphs      set in  bold  italic  type
and  plain  type, which   have   equal  authority.   Paragraphs     in bold  italic type
indicate  the  main   principles.  This  Accounting     Standard   should   be  read  in
the context  of its objective  and   the Preface   to the Statements    of Accounting
Standards1.)

The  following   is the  text of the  revised  Accounting     Standard    (AS ) 5, ‘Net
Profit or Loss  for the  Period,  Prior Period   Items  and  Changes    in Accounting
Policies’, issued  by  the Council   of the  Institute of Chartered    Accountants    of
India.

This  revised   standard   comes    into effect  in  respect  of  accounting    periods
commencing      on or after  1.4.1996   and  ismandatory     in nature.2  Itis clarified
thatinrespect   of accountingperiods      commencingonadateprior           to1.4.1996,
Accounting      Standard    5  as  originally   issued    in November,       1982   (and
subsequently    made   mandatory)     will  apply.

Objective
Theobjective    of this Statementis   to prescribethe    classification and  disclosure
of certain  items   in the  statement   of  profit  and  loss  so  that all enterprises

*A  limitedrevision was  made  in 2001, pursuant to which  paragraph  33 has been added
inthis standard  (see footnote 3).  The  Standard  was  originally issued  in November
1982 and  was titled‘Prior Period  and Extraordinary  Items and  Changes  in Accounting
Policies’.

1Attention is specificallydrawn  to paragraph  4.3  ofthe Preface,  according  towhich
Accounting  Standards  are intended  toapply  only to items which  are material.

2Reference  may  be made  tothe section titled‘Announcements    ofthe Council  regarding
statusof various documents   issued by  theInstitute ofChartered  Accountants   of India’
appearing  at the beginning   of this Compendium      for a detailed discussion   on the
implications of the mandatory  status of an accounting  standard.
92   AS  5 (revised  1997)

prepare  and  present  such   a statement   on a  uniform   basis. This  enhances    the
comparability   of the financial  statements   of an  enterprise  over time  and  with
the financial   statements   of  other  enterprises.  Accordingly,    this  Statement
requires  the classification  and   disclosure  of  extraordinary   and  prior  period
items, and  the disclosure   of certain  items within   profit or loss from  ordinary
activities.Italso specifies  theaccountingtreatmentfor        changesinaccounting
estimates  andthe   disclosures  to bemadein     thefinancialstatementsregarding
changes   in accounting    policies.

Scope
1.   This  Statement     should   be  applied    by  an  enterprise    in presenting
profit  or  loss from    ordinary    activities, extraordinary      items  and   prior
period  items  in the statement   of profit  and  loss, in accounting    for changes
in accounting     estimates,   and   in  disclosure    of changes     in accounting
policies.

2.   This Statement   deals  with,amongother      matters,the   disclosure  of certain
items  of  net profit  or loss  for  the period.   These   disclosures   are  made   in
addition  to any  other  disclosures   required   by other  Accounting     Standards.

3.   This Statement does not deal with the tax implications of extraordinary
items, prior  period  items,  changes   in  accounting   estimates,   and  changes   in
accounting   policies  for which   appropriate   adjustments   will have   to be made
depending    on  the circumstances.

Definitions
4.   The  following    terms   are  used  in  this Statement    with   the meanings
specified:

Ordinary     activities  are   any   activities  which    are   undertaken      by  an
enterprise  as  part  of its business   and  such   related  activities in which    the
enterprise  engages    in furtherance    of, incidental   to,or  arising  from,  these
activities.

Extraordinary     items  are   income    or expenses    that  arise  from   events   or
transactions   that  are  clearly  distinct  from   the  ordinary    activities of  the
enterprise and, therefore, are not     expected    to recur frequently or regularly.

Prior period   items  are income   or  expenses   which   arise in the current   period
                                            Net  Profitor Loss  for the Period     93

as  a  result  of errors   or omissions     in the  preparation    of  the  financial
statements    of one  or  more   prior periods.

Accounting     policies arethe   specific accounting    principles  and  the methods
of  applying   those  principles   adopted   by  an  enterprise  in  the preparation
and   presentation   of  financial  statements.

Net    Profit      or  Loss     for    the   Period
5.   All  items  of income    and   expense   which   are  recognised    in a  period
should   be included   in the determination     of net profit or loss for  the period
unless   an  Accounting    Standard    requires   or permits   otherwise.

6.   Normally,    allitems  of  income   and  expense   which   are  recognised   in a
period   are included    in the determination    of  the  net profit  or loss  for the
period.   This  includes   extraordinary    items  and   the effects  of  changes   in
accounting    estimates.

7.    The   net  profit  or  loss   for  the  period    comprises     the  following
components,     each  of which   should  bedisclosed    on thefaceof    the statement
of  profit and  loss:

       (a)   profit or loss  from   ordinary   activities; and

       (b)   extraordinary    items.

Extraordinary           Items
8.   Extraordinary     items   should   be  disclosed   in the  statement   of  profit
and   loss as a  part of net  profit or  loss for the  period.  The  nature   and  the
amount    of each   extraordinary    item  should   be separately   disclosed   in the
statement   of  profit and  loss in  a manner    that its impact   on current   profit
or  loss can  be  perceived.

9.   Virtually  all items of  income   and  expense   included  in the determination
ofnet  profit or loss for the period  arise inthe  course  of the ordinary  activities
of the  enterprise.   Therefore,    only   on  rare  occasions    does  an  event   or
transaction   give  rise to an extraordinary    item.

10.    Whether   an  event  or  transaction  is clearly  distinct from   the ordinary
activitiesoftheenterpriseis    determined   bythenature   oftheeventortransaction
94   AS  5 (revised  1997)

in relation to the  business  ordinarily   carried on  by  the enterprise  rather  than
by the  frequency   with  which   such  events  are  expected   to occur.  Therefore,
an event  or transaction  may  be  extraordinaryforone      enterprise  but not so  for
anotherenterprisebecauseofthedifferences          betweentheirrespectiveordinary
activities. For  example,   losses  sustained   as a  result of an  earthquake    may
qualify as an  extraordinary   itemformanyenterprises.       However,claims      from
policyholders arising from an earthquake do not qualify as an extraordinary
item for  an insurance    enterprise  that insures  against   such  risks.

11.   Examples      of events    or  transactions    that  generally    give  rise  to
extraordinary   items  for  most  enterprises   are:

      –     attachment    of property   of the  enterprise;  or

      –     an  earthquake.

Profit    or  Loss    from     Ordinary        Activities
12.   When     items  of  income     and  expense     within   profit  or  loss  from
ordinary    activities   are  of  such   size,  nature   or  incidence     that  their
disclosure   is relevant   to explain   the  performance      of  the enterprise   for
the period,   the  nature   and   amount     of such   items   should   be  disclosed
separately.

13.   Although    the items  of income   and  expense    described   in paragraph   12
are not  extraordinary    items, the  nature  and   amount   of  such  items  may   be
relevant  to  users  of  financial  statements    in  understanding     the financial
position  and  performance    of  an enterprise  and  in making    projections  about
financial  position   and   performance.     Disclosure    of  such  information     is
sometimes    made   in the  notes  to the financial  statements.

14.   Circumstances     which   may  give  rise to the separate  disclosure   of items
of income   and  expense    in accordance    with  paragraph   12  include:

      (a)   the write-down     of inventories   to  net realisable  value   as well  as
            the  reversal  of such  write-downs;

      (b)   a restructuring   of the  activities of  an enterprise   and  the reversal
            of  any  provisions   for the costs  of  restructuring;

      (c)   disposals   of items  of fixed  assets;
                                             Net Profit or Loss  for the Period      95

      (d)   disposals   of long-term    investments;

      (e)   legislative  changes    having   retrospective   application;

      (f)   litigation  settlements;   and

      (g)   other  reversals   of provisions.

Prior    Period      Items
15.   The   nature   and  amount     of prior  period   items  should   be  separately
disclosed  in the  statement   of profit  and  loss  in a manner    that  their impact
on the  current   profit  or loss  can  be  perceived.

16.   The  term  ‘prior  period  items’,  as defined   in this Statement,   refers  only
to income   or expenses    which   arise in the  current  period  as  a result of errors
or omissions    in the preparation    of the  financial  statements   of  one  or more
prior periods.  The   term  does  not  include  other  adjustments    necessitated   by
circumstances,    which   though   related  to prior periods,  are  determined    in the
current  period,  e.g.,  arrears  payable   to workers    as  a result  of revision   of
wages   with  retrospective   effect  during   the current  period.

17.   Errors  in  the  preparation   of  the  financial  statements    of one   or more
prior periods   may   be discovered    in the  current  period.  Errors   may   occur  as
aresult  of mathematical    mistakes,   mistakes   in applying   accounting    policies,
misinterpretation    of facts, or  oversight.

18.   Prior   period   items   are generally    infrequent    in  nature  and   can  be
distinguished   from   changes   in accounting    estimates.   Accounting    estimates
by  their nature   are  approximations      that may   need   revision   as additional
information   becomes     known.   For  example,    income    or expense   recognised
on the  outcome    of a contingency     which   previously   could   not be  estimated
reliably does   not constitute   a prior  period  item.

19.   Prior  period  items   are normally    included   in the  determination    of  net
profit or loss for the current   period.  An  alternative  approach   is to show   such
items  in the statement    of profit  and  loss after  determination    of current   net
profit or loss.  In either  case,  the objective   is to indicate  the  effect of  such
items  on  the current  profit  or loss.
96   AS  5 (revised  1997)
Changes       in  Accounting         Estimates
20.   As  a result  of the  uncertainties   inherent  in  business   activities, many
financial  statement   items  cannot   be measured     with  precision  but  can  only
be estimated.  The   estimation  process   involves  judgments    based  on  the latest
information   available.  Estimates  maybe    required,for   example,   of bad  debts,
inventory  obsolescence     or the useful  lives of depreciable    assets. The  use  of
reasonable    estimates   is an  essential  part  of the  preparation    of  financial
statements   and  does  not  undermine    their  reliability.

21.   An   estimate  may   have   to be  revised  if changes    occur  regarding    the
circumstances     on  which   the  estimate   was   based,   or  as a  result  of new
information,   more  experience    or subsequent    developments.    The   revision  of
the estimate, by  itsnature, does  not bringthe   adjustmentwithin     the definitions
of an extraordinary    item  or a prior  period  item.

22.   Sometimes,it   is difficultto distinguish  between  achange    inanaccounting
policy  and  a change   in an accounting    estimate.  In such  cases,  the change   is
treated as  a change   in an accounting    estimate,  with  appropriate   disclosure.

23.   The  effect  of a change   in an  accounting    estimate   should   be included
in the determination     of net  profit or  loss in:

      (a)   the  period   of  the  change,    if the  change     affects  the  period
            only;  or

      (b)   the  period   of  the change     and  future   periods,   if the  change
            affects  both.

24.   A  change   in an accounting    estimate  may   affect the current  period   only
or both  the current  period  and  future  periods.  For  example,    a change   in the
estimate  of the amount   of bad  debts  isrecognised    immediately    and  therefore
affects only  the  current  period.  However,    a change   in  the estimated   useful
lifeof a depreciable    asset affects  the depreciation   in the current   period  and
in each  period   during  the  remaining   useful   lifeof  the asset.  In both  cases,
the effect of the change   relating to the current  period   isrecognised   as income
or expense    in the  current  period.  The   effect,  ifany,  on  future  periods,   is
recognised   in future  periods.

25.   The  effect of a changein     an accounting    estimate   should   be classified
using  the  same   classification   in the  statement    of profit  and  loss  as  was
used  previously   for  the estimate.
                                            Net Profit or Loss  forthe  Period     97

26.   To ensure   the comparability   of financial  statements   ofdifferent  periods,
the effect  of  a change    in an  accounting    estimate   which   was   previously
included   in the  profit or  loss  from  ordinary   activities  is included   in that
component     of net  profit or loss.  The  effect  of a change    in an  accounting
estimate  that was   previously   included   as an  extraordinary   item  is reported
as an extraordinary    item.

27.   The  nature   and  amount    of a change   in an  accounting    estimate  which
has a  material   effect in the current   period,  or  which   isexpected   to have   a
material    effect  in  subsequent     periods,    should    be  disclosed.   If  it is
impracticable    to quantify   the amount,    this  fact should   be  disclosed.

Changes         in  Accounting           Policies
28.   Users   need   to be  able   to compare     the financial   statements    of  an
enterprise  over  a period   of time  in order  to  identify trends   in itsfinancial
position,  performance     and   cash  flows.   Therefore,    the same   accounting
policies are normally   adopted  for similar events  or transactionsin   each  period.

29.   A change    inanaccounting      policy  shouldbe   made    only ifthe  adoption
of a different  accounting     policy  isrequired   by  statute  or for  compliance
with an  accounting     standard   or if itis considered    that the  change   would
result in  a more   appropriate    presentation    of the  financial   statements   of
the enterprise.

30.   A  more    appropriate    presentation    of events   or  transactions   in  the
financial statements occurs when the new accounting policy results in more
relevant  or reliable  information    about  the  financial  position,  performance
or cash  flows  of  the enterprise.

31.   The  following   are  not changes    in accounting   policies  :

      (a)   the adoption    of an  accounting   policy   for events  or  transactions
            that  differ  in substance    from   previously    occurring   events   or
            transactions,   e.g., introduction   of  a  formal  retirement    gratuity
            scheme    by an  employer   in place  of ad  hoc  ex-gratia payments    to
            employees    on  retirement;   and

      (b)   theadoption    of a new  accounting   policy  for events  or transactions
            which   did  not occur   previously   or that were   immaterial.
98   AS  5 (revised  1997)

32.   Any   change    in an  accounting     policy  which    has  a  material   effect
should   be disclosed.   The  impact   of, and   the adjustments     resulting  from,
such  change,   if material,   should  be  shown    in the financial   statements   of
the period   in  which   such   change    is made,   to  reflect the  effect  of such
change.   Where    the effect  of such   change   is not  ascertainable,    wholly  or
inpart,  the fact should   be indicated.   Ifa change    ismade   in the accounting
policies which    has  no  material   effect on  the  financial  statements    for the
current  period   but which   is reasonably    expected   to have  a material   effect
in later periods,  the fact  of such  change    should   be appropriately    disclosed
in the period   in which   the  change   is adopted.

33.   A  change   in accounting     policy consequent     upon   the adoption    of an
Accounting     Standard    should   be  accounted     for in  accordance     with  the
specific  transitional    provisions,   if any,   contained    in  that  Accounting
Standard.   However,disclosuresrequiredby          paragraph32of      thisStatement
should  be  made   unless  the transitional  provisions   of any  other  Accounting
Standard    require  alternative   disclosures   in this  regard.3

















































3As a limitedrevision toAS  5, theCouncil  ofthe Institutedecided toadd  thisparagraph
inAS   5 in 2001.  This revision  comes  into effect in respect of accounting  periods
commencing   on  or after1.4.2001  (see‘The  Chartered  Accountant’,  September  2001,
pp.342).