128
Accounting      Standard     (AS  )  9
(issued1985)

Revenue        Recognition


Contents


INTRODUCTION                                             Paragraphs    1-4
Definitions                                                              4
EXPLANATION                                                            5-9
Sale of Goods                                                            6
Rendering   of  Services                                                 7
The  Use  by Others   of Enterprise   Resources   Yielding  Interest,
  Royalties  and  Dividends                                              8
Effect of Uncertainties   on  Revenue   Recognition                      9
ACCOUNTING        STANDARD                                          10-14
Disclosure                                                              14
APPENDIX

 The following  Accounting  Standards Interpretation(A SI) relatestoAS  9:

        Revised ASI  14 - Disclosure of Revenue  from  Sales Transactions

  The  above Interpretation ispublished elsewhere  in thisCompendium.
122    AS  9 (issued  1985)                              Revenue    Recognition     129
Accounting           Standard          (AS    ) 9
(issue d  1985)

Revenue         Recognition

(Thi s Accounting     Standard    includes    paragraphs     10-14    set in  bold  italic
type  and   paragraphs      1-9  set  in plain   type,  which    have   equal   authority.
Paragraphs       in  bold   italic   type   indicate    the   main    principles.     This
Accounting     Standard    should   be  read   in the  context   of  the  Preface   to  the
Statements    of  Accounting      Standards1.)

      The   following   is the text  of the Accounting     Standard    (AS  ) 9 issued  by
the Institute  of Chartered    Accountants     of India   on ‘Revenue     Recognition’.2

      In the initial years,this   accounting    standard  will  be recommendatoryin
character.   During    this period,   this  standard    is recommended        for use   by
companies    listedonarecognisedstockexchangeand              other  large  commercial,
industrial  and  business   enterprises   in the  public  and   private  sectors.3

Introduction
1.   This  Statement    deals  with   the bases   for  recognition   of  revenue    in the
statement   of  profit  and  loss  of an  enterprise.   The   Statement    is concerned
with the  recognitionof    revenue   arising  in the courseof    the ordinaryactivities
of the  enterprise   from
      —     the  sale  of goods,4



1Attention  isspecifically drawn  to paragraph   4.3 of the Preface, according   towhich
Accounting   Standards  are  intended  to apply  only to items  which  are  material.

2It isreiterated  that this Accounting    Standard  (a s isthe  case of  other accounting
standards)  assumes   that the three  fundamental   accounting   assumptions   i.e.,going
concern,   consistency   and  accrual   have  been   followed   in the  preparation   and
presentation  of financial  statements.

3It may  be noted  that this Accounting   Standard   is now  mandatory.   Reference   may
be made   to the  section titled ‘Announcements     of the  Council  regarding   status of
various  documents     issued  by  the Institute  of Chartered   Accountants    of  India’
appearing   at the beginning   of this Compendium      for a  detailed discussion   on the
implications  of the  mandatory   status of  an accounting   standard.

4See  also revised  Accounting   Standards  Interpretation (ASI)  14, which   ispublished
elsewhere  in this Compendium.
130    AS  9 (issued  1985)

      —      the rendering    of services,   and

      —      the use by  others  of enterprise  resources   yielding   interest, royalties
             and  dividends.

2.   This  Statement     does   not  deal  with   the  following    aspects   of  revenue
recognition   to which   special  considerations     apply:
        (i)  Revenue     arising  from   construction    contracts;5

       (ii)  Revenue     arising  from   hire-purchase,     lease  agreements;

      (iii)  Revenue     arising   from    government      grants   and   other   similar
             subsidies;

      (iv)   Revenueof     insurance   companies     arising from   insurance   contracts.

3.   Examples     of items   not  included   within   the  definition   of “revenue”     for
the purpose    of this  Statement    are:

        (i)  Realisedgains    resulting   from  the disposal   of, and  unrealisedgains
             resulting  from   theholding    of, non-current    assets e.g. appreciation
             in the  value  of  fixed  assets;

       (ii)  Unrealised    holding   gains   resulting   from  the  change    in value   of
             current  assets,  and  the natural   increases   in herds  and  agricultural
             and  forest  products;

      (iii)  Realised   or  unrealised    gains  resulting   from   changes    in foreign
             exchange    ratesand   adjustmentsarisingonthetranslation          of foreign
             currency    financial  statements;

      (iv)   Realised   gains   resulting   from   the  discharge   of  an  obligation    at
             less than  its carrying   amount;

       (v )  Unrealised    gains   resulting  from   the  restatement    of  the  carrying
             amount    of an obligation.






5Refer  to AS  7 on  ‘Accounting   for Construction  Contracts’.  AS  7 (issued  1983)  has
been  revised  in 2002  and  titled as ‘Construction   Contracts’.   The  revised  AS  7  is
published  elsewhere   in this Compendium.
                                                        Revenue    Recognition     131
Definitions
4.   The   following    terms   are  used   in this  Statement    with   the  meanings
specified:

4.1   Revenue    is the gross  inflow   of cash,  receivables   or other  consideration
arising in the  course  of  the ordinary   activities of  an enterprise6   from  the  sale
of  goods,   from   the  rendering    of  services,   and   from   the  use   by  others
of  enterprise     resources     yielding    interest,   royalties    and    dividends.
Revenue    is  measured     by  the  charges    made    to customers     or  clients  for
goods   supplied and      services   rendered    to them    and  by   the  charges   and
rewards    arising   from  the    use   of   resources    by   them.    In  an   agency
relationship,   the  revenue   is  the amount    of  commission     and   not  the gross
inflow  of cash,  receivables   or other consideration.

4.2   Completed     service  contract   method     is a method    of accounting    which
recognisesrevenue     in the statement   of profit andloss   only  whenthe    rendering
of services  under   a contract   is completed    or  substantially   completed.

4.3   Proportionate     completion     method    isa  method     of accounting    which
recognises   revenue   in  the statement   of  profit and  loss  proportionately    with
the degree   of  completion    of  services  under   a contract.

Explanation
5.   Revenue    recognition   is mainly   concerned    with  the timing  of  recognition
of revenue   in  the statement   of  profit and   loss of  an enterprise.   The  amount
of revenue    arising   on  a transaction    is usually   determined     by  agreement
between    the parties  involved    in  the transaction.   When     uncertainties   exist
regarding    the   determination     of   the   amount,    or   its  associated    costs,
these uncertainties    may  influence   the  timing  of  revenue   recognition.







6The  Institute  has issued  an  Announcement      in 2005  titled ‘Treatment   of  Inter-
divisional Transfers’ (published  in ‘The Chartered  Accountant’   May  2005,  pp. 1531).
As per  the Announcement,     the recognition   of inter-divisional transfers  as sales is
an inappropriate  accounting   treatment  and  is inconsistent  with Accounting    Stand-
ard 9. [For full textof the Announcement    reference  may  be made  to the section titled
‘Announcements     of the Council   regarding  status  of various  documents   issued  by
the Instituteof  Chartered  Accountants   of  India’ appearing  at the beginning   of this
Compendium.]
132    AS 9 (issued  1985)
6.    Sale    of  Goods
6.1   A  key  criterion  for  determining    when    to recognise   revenue    from   a
transaction  involving   the  sale of goods   is that the seller has  transferred  the
property  in the goods  tothe  buyer  for aconsideration.   Thetransferof    property
ingoods,   in most  cases, results  inor coincides   with  the transfer  of significant
risksand  rewards   of ownership   to the buyer.  However,   there  may  besituations
where   transfer of  property   in goods   does  not  coincide  with  the  transfer  of
significant  risks and  rewards    of ownership.    Revenue    in  such  situations  is
recognised    at the  time   of  transfer  of  significant   risks  and   rewards    of
ownership    to  the buyer.   Such   cases   may   arise  where   delivery   has  been
delayed  through   the  fault of either  the buyer   or the seller and  the  goods   are
at the risk  of the  party  at fault as regards   any  loss  which   might   not have
occurred   but for  such  fault. Further,  sometimes     the parties  may  agree   that
the risk will pass  at a time  different  from  the  time  when   ownership    passes.

6.2   At certain  stages  inspecific  industries,  such  as when   agriculturalcrops
have  been  harvested   or mineral   ores have  been  extracted,   performance    may
be substantially  complete   prior  totheexecution    ofthe  transactiongenerating
revenue.  In  such  cases  when   sale  is assured  under   a forward   contract  or  a
government    guarantee   or  where   market  exists  and  there  isa negligible   risk
of failure to sell,the goods   involved   are often  valued  at net realisable  value.
Such  amounts,   while  not revenue   asdefined   inthis  Statement,   are sometimes
recognised   in the statement   of  profit and  loss and   appropriately   described.

7.    Rendering         of  Services
7.1   Revenue    from  service  transactions   isusually   recognised   as the service
is performed,    either  by  the  proportionate    completion     method    or  by  the
completed    service  contract  method.

       (i)  Proportionate     completion     method—Performance           consists   of
            the  execution    of  more   than   one  act.  Revenue     is recognised
            proportionately by reference to the performance of each act. The
            revenue   recognised    under   this method   would   be  determined    on
            the  basis  of contract  value,  associated   costs,  number    of acts  or
            other  suitable  basis.  For  practical  purposes,    when   services   are
            provided   byan   indeterminatenumber      of acts over  aspecificperiod
            of  time, revenue    is recognised   on  a  straight line  basis over   the
            specific  period   unless  there is evidence   that some   other  method
            better  represents   the  pattern  of performance.
                                                      Revenue    Recognition    133

    (ii)    Completed     service  contract   method—Performance          consists  of
           the execution   of asingle  act.Alternatively,   services  are performed
            in more   than  a single  act, and  the  services  yet to be  performed
           are  so significant  in  relation to  the transaction   taken  as a whole
           that performance     cannot  be deemed    to have  been  completed    until
           the  execution    of  those  acts.  The   completed     service  contract
            method    is  relevant   to  these   patterns   of  performance       and
            accordingly   revenue   isrecognised   when   the sole  or finalact takes
            place  and  the  service  becomes    chargeable.

8.    The    Use   by   Others      of Enterprise        Resources       Yielding
Interest,     Royalties      and     Dividends
8.1   The  use  by  others  of such  enterprise   resources   gives  rise to:

       (i)  interest—charges     for  the use  of  cash  resources   or amounts    due
            to the  enterprise;

       (ii) royalties—charges       for  the  use  of such   assets   as know-how,
            patents,  trade  marks   and  copyrights;

      (iii) dividends—rewards       from   the holding   of investments   in shares.

8.2   Interest accrues,  in most   circumstances,    on the  time  basis determined
bythe  amount  outstanding   and the rateapplicable.  Usually,  discountorpremium
on debt  securities held  is treated as  though  it were  accruing   over the  period
tomaturity.

8.3   Royalties  accrue  in accordance    withthe  terms  of the relevant  agreement
and are usually  recognised   on thatbasis  unless, having   regard to the substance
of the  transactions,  it is more   appropriate    to recognise   revenue    on  some
other systematic   and  rational  basis.

8.4   Dividends   from  investments   in shares arenotrecognised     in the statement
of profit and  loss until a right to receive  payment    is established.

8.5   When   interest, royalties  and  dividends   from  foreign   countries  require
exchange   permission    and  uncertainty   in remittance   is anticipated,  revenue
recognition  may   need  to be  postponed.
134   AS  9 (issued  1985)
9.    Effect     of  Uncertainties         on    Revenue       Recognition
9.1   Recognition    of revenue   requires  that revenue   ismeasurable    and  that at
the time of sale or the rendering of the service it would not be unreasonable
toexpect   ultimate  collection.

9.2   Where    the ability  to assess   the ultimate   collection   with  reasonable
certainty  islacking   at the time  of  raising any  claim,  e.g., for escalation   of
price, exportincentives,   interest etc., revenue  recognition   is postponed   to the
extent  of uncertainty    involved.   In  such   cases,  itmay   be  appropriate    to
recognise   revenue    only  when    it is reasonably    certain  that  the  ultimate
collectionwillbe   made.Wherethereis       no uncertainty  as toultimate   collection,
revenue  is recognised   at the time  of sale or rendering  of service  even  though
payments   are  made   by  instalments.

9.3   When   the  uncertainty  relating  tocollectability  arises subsequent    to the
time of sale  or the rendering   of the service,  itis more  appropriate   to make   a
separate  provision  to reflect the uncertainty   rather than  to adjust the  amount
of revenue   originally recorded.

9.4   An   essential   criterion  for  the  recognition    of  revenue    is that  the
consideration   receivable   for the sale  of goods,  the  rendering   of services  or
from  the use  by  others  of enterprise  resources   is reasonably    determinable.
When   such  consideration    is not determinable    within   reasonable   limits, the
recognition  of  revenue   ispostponed.

9.5   When     recognition    of  revenue   is  postponed     due  to  the  effect  of
uncertainties,  itisconsidered    as revenue  of the period  in which   itis properly
recognised.

                         Accounting          Standard
10.   Revenue    from   sales  or  service  transactions    should   be  recognised
when   the  requirements    as  to performance      set out  in paragraphs     11  and
12  are  satisfied,   provided    that  at  the  time   of performance       it is not
unreasonable     to expect   ultimate   collection.  If  at the  time  of  raising  of
any  claim    itis  unreasonable      to  expect   ultimate    collection,   revenue
recognition   should   be  postponed.

11.   In  a transaction    involving   the  sale  of goods,   performance      should
be regarded    as being   achieved   when    the following    conditions   have  been
                                                     Revenue   Recognition     135

fulfilled:

      (i)   the seller  of goods   has  transferred   to  the buyer   the  property
            in the goods   for a  price or  allsignificant   risks and  rewards   of
            ownership    have   been  transferred    to the buyer   and   the seller
            retains  no effective  control  of the goods  transferred   to a degree
            usually  associated    with  ownership;    and

      (ii)  no  significant  uncertainty   exists  regarding   the  amount    of the
            consideration    that will  be derived   from   the sale  of the  goods.

12.   In a  transaction   involving   the  rendering   of  services,  performance
should  be  measured    either  under  the  completed    service contract   method
or under   the  proportionate     completion    method,    whichever    relates  the
revenue    to  the  work   accomplished.       Such    performance      should    be
regarded     as   being    achieved     when     no    significant    uncertainty
exists  regarding     the   amount     of   the   consideration      that   will  be
derived  from rendering      the  service.

13.   Revenue    arising   from   the  use  by  others  of  enterprise   resources
yielding  interest, royalties and  dividends   should   only  be recognised   when
no  significant   uncertainty    as to  measurability    or  collectability  exists.
These  revenues    are  recognised    on  the following   bases:

 (i)  Interest                  :  on  a  time  proportion     basis   taking   into
                                   account   the  amount    outstanding     and  the
                                   rate  applicable.

(ii)  Royalties                 :  on  an  accrual    basis  in accordance     with
                                   the  terms  of  the relevant   agreement.

(iii) Dividends    from         :  when   the owner’s   right  to receive payment
      investments    in            is established.
      shares

Disclosure
14.   In addition   to the  disclosures   required   by  Accounting     Standard   1
on ‘Disclosure    of Accounting    Policies’  (A S 1) ,an  enterprise   should   also
disclose   the  circumstances      in which    revenue    recognition     has  been
postponed    pending   the  resolution   of significant   uncertainties.
136    AS  9(issued  1985)
APPENDIX

This  appendix   is illustrative only  and  does   not form   part of the  accounting
standard  set forth inthis Statement.   Thepurpose     of theappendix    isto illustrate
the application   of the  Standard   to a number    of commercial     situations  in an
endeavour to assist in clarifying application of the Standard.

A.     Sale    of  Goods
1.   Delivery    is delayed    at  buyer’s   request    and   buyer   takes   title and
accepts   billing

Revenue   shouldbe    recognisednotwithstandingthatphysicaldeliveryhasnot
been  completed    so  long  as there  is every  expectation    that delivery   will be
made.  However,    the  item  must  be on  hand,  identified  and  ready  for delivery
to the buyer  at the time  the  sale is recognised   rather  than  there being   simply
an intention  to acquire   or manufacture     the goods   in time  for delivery.

2.   Delivered    subject   to conditions

(a)  installation   and  inspection   i.e. goods   are  sold  subject  to  installation,
      inspection   etc.

Revenue   should  normallynotbe     recogniseduntilthecustomeracceptsdelivery
and  installation  and  inspection   are  complete.   In some    cases, however,    the
installation process   may   be so simple   in nature  that itmay   be appropriate    to
recognise  the  sale notwithstandingthat     installation  isnot  yet completed    (e.g.
installation  of a  factory-tested   television   receiver  normally    only  requires
unpacking    and  connecting    of power   and  antennae).

(b)   on approval

Revenue   should  not  be recognised   untilthe goods   havebeenformally      accepted
by the  buyer   or the  buyer  has  done   an  act adopting   the  transaction   or the
time  period  for  rejection  has  elapsed   or  where   no  time  has  been   fixed,  a
reasonable   time  has  elapsed.

(c)   guaranteed    sales i.e. delivery   is made   giving   the buyer   an  unlimited
      right of return

Recognition of revenue in such circumstances will depend on the substance
                                                       Revenue   Recognition     137

of the agreement.    In the case  of retail sales offering  a guarantee   of  “money
back  ifnot  completely   satisfied”  itmay   be appropriate   to recognise   the sale
but to make  a suitable  provision  for returns  based  on  previous  experience.   In
other  cases,  the  substance    of  the  agreement    may    amount    to a  sale  on
consignment,    in which   case  itshould   be treated  as indicated   below.

(d)   consignment     sales  i.e. a  delivery   is made    whereby     the recipient
      undertakes   to sell the goods   on  behalf  of the consignor

Revenue   should   not  be recognised   until  the goods   are sold  to a third party.

(e)  cash  on  delivery   sales

Revenue   should   not  be recognised    until cash  isreceived   by  the seller or his
agent.

3.   Sales  where    the purchaser     makes    a series   of instalment    payments
to the seller, and  the  seller delivers  the goods   only  when   the  final payment
is received

Revenue   from   such  sales should  not  be recognised   until goods   are delivered.
However,     when   experience     indicates   that  most   such   sales  have   been
consummated,      revenue   may   be  recognised    when   a  significant  deposit   is
received.

4.   Special  order   and  shipments    i.e.where   payment    (o r partial  payment)
is received  for  goods   not  presently   held  in stock  e.g. the  stock  is stillto
be manufactured      or  is to  be  delivered   directly  to  the customer     from  a
third party

Revenue     from   such   sales  should    not  be  recognised     until  goods    are
manufactured,    identified   and  ready  for  delivery  to  the buyer   by  the third
party.

5.   Sale/repurchase      agreements     i.e. where   seller  concurrently     agrees
to repurchase    the  same   goods   at  a later  date

Forsuch   transactions  thatare  insubstance   afinancing   agreement,   theresulting
cash inflow  is not revenue  as defined  and  shouldnotbe     recognised   as revenue.

6.   Sales  to intermediate   parties  i.e. where   goods   are sold  to distributors,
dealers  or  others   for resale
138   AS  9 (issued  1985)

Revenue   from   such  sales  can  generally  be  recognised   ifsignificant  risks of
ownership   have  passed; however    insome   situations the buyer  may  insubstance
be an agent  and  insuch  cases  the sale should  be treated  as aconsignment    sale.

7.   Subscriptions    for  publications

Revenue    received  or  billed should   be  deferred  and  recognised    either on  a
straight line basis over  time  or,where   the items  delivered  vary  in value  from
period  to period,   revenue   should   be based   on  the  sales value   of the item
delivered   in relation  to the  total  sales value   of all items   covered   by  the
subscription.

8.   Instalment    sales

When   the consideration    isreceivable   in instalments,   revenue  attributable  to
the sales price  exclusive  of interest  should  be recognised    at the date of sale.
The  interest element  should   be recognised   as revenue,   proportionately   to the
unpaid  balance   due  to the seller.

9.   Trade   discounts    and  volume    rebates

Trade  discounts   and  volume    rebates  received   are not  encompassed     within
the definition  of  revenue,   since  they  represent   a reduction   of  cost. Trade
discounts  andvolume    rebates given  shouldbe   deductedin   determiningrevenue.

B.    Rendering         of   Services
1.   Installation   Fees

In cases  where   installation  fees  are  other  than  incidental  to  the sale  of a
product,  they  should  be  recognised   as revenue   only  when   the  equipment    is
installed and  accepted   by  the  customer.

2.   Advertising    and   insurance    agency    commissions

Revenue     should   be   recognised    when     the  service   is  completed.     For
advertising  agencies,    media    commissions      will  normally    be  recognised
when   the related advertisement     or  commercial     appears   before   the public
and  the  necessary intimation      is received    by  the  agency,   as opposed    to
production    commission, which       will  be  recognised    when    the  project   is
completed.    Insurance    agency    commissions     should   be recognised    on  the
effective commencement      or renewal   dates  of the  related policies.
                                                       Revenue    Recognition    139

3.   Financial    service  commissions

A financial  service  may   be rendered    as a single act or  may  be  provided   over
a period   of time.  Similarly,   charges   for such   services  may   be  made    as a
single amount    or  in stages  over  the period   of the  service  or the  life of the
transaction   to which   it relates. Such   charges   may   be  settled  in full when
made  or added   toa loanor   other account   andsettled   instages.The    recognition
of such  revenue   should   therefore   have  regard   to:

      (a)   whether    the service  has  been  provided   “once   and  for all” or is on
            a “continuing”    basis;

      (b)   the  incidence   of the  costs relating  to the  service;

      (c)   when   the  payment    for  the service   will be  received.   In general,
            commissions      charged    for arranging    or  granting   loan  or other
            facilities shouldberecognisedwhenabinding            obligationhas    been
            entered  into. Commitment,     facility or loanmanagementfeeswhich
            relate  to continuing    obligations   or services  should   normally    be
            recognised    over the  lifeof the loan  or facility havingregard    to the
            amount    of the  obligation   outstanding,   the nature  of  the services
            provided    and  the timing  of  the costs  relating thereto.

4.   Admission     fees

Revenue   from  artistic performances,banquets      and  other  special eventsshould
be recognised    when   the event  takes  place. When    a subscription   to a number
of events  is sold,  the fee  should  be  allocated   to each  event  on  a systematic
and  rational basis.

5.   Tuition   fees

Revenue    should  be  recognised   over   the period  of  instruction.

6.   Entrance    and   membership      fees

Revenue    recognition   from   these  sources   will depend    on  the nature   of the
services  being  provided.    Entrance   fee  received   is generally  capitalised.   If
the membership      fee  permits   only   membership     and   all other   services  or
products   are   paid   for   separately,   or   if  there   is  a  separate    annual
subscription,   the  fee  should     be   recognised      when    received.     If  the
membership     fee  entitles  the
140    AS  9(issued  1985)

member    to services  or publications   to be  provided   during  the  year, itshould
be recognised   on  a systematic   and  rational  basis having   regard  to the timing
and  nature  of all services  provided.